

[PDF page 1]



[PDF page 2]



[PDF page 3]

Copyright © 2019 by Emily Nagoski, PhD, and Amelia Nagoski Peterson, DMA
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Ballantine Books, an imprint of Random House, a division of
Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
BALLANTINE and the HOUSE colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Names: Nagoski, Emily, author. | Nagoski, Amelia, author.
Title: Burnout : the secret to unlocking the stress cycle / Emily Nagoski, Ph.D. and Amelia Nagoski,
DMA.
Description: First edition. | New York : Ballantine Books, [2019] | Includes bibliographical references
and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2018051131 (print) | LCCN 2018054198 (ebook) | ISBN 9781984817075 (ebook) |
ISBN 9781984817068 (hardback)
Subjects: LCSH: Stress management. | Women—Health and hygiene. | BISAC: SELF-HELP / Stress
Management. | HEALTH & FITNESS / Women’s Health. | SOCIAL SCIENCE / Women’s Studies.
Classiﬁcation: LCC RA785 (ebook) | LCC RA785 .N35 2019 (print) | DDC 155.9/042—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/ 2018051131
Hardback ISBN 9781984817068
International edition ISBN 9781984817808
Ebook ISBN 9781984817075
randomhousebooks.com
Book design by Elizabeth A. D. Eno, adapted for ebook
Cover design: Faceout Studio
Art direction: Joseph Perez
v5.4_r1
ep

[PDF page 4]

Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Introduction
Part I: What You Take with You
1. Complete the Cycle
2. #Persist
3. Meaning
Part II: The Real Enemy
4. The Game Is Rigged
5. The Bikini Industrial Complex
Part III: Wax on, Wax Oﬀ
6. Connect
7. What Makes You Stronger
8. Grow Mighty
Conclusion: Joyfully Ever After
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Notes
References
About the Authors

[PDF page 5]

INTRODUCTION
This is a book for any woman who has felt overwhelmed and exhausted by
everything she had to do, and yet still worried she was not doing “enough.”
Which is every woman we know—including us.
You’ve heard the usual advice over and over: exercise, green smoothies,
self-compassion, coloring books, mindfulness, bubble baths,
gratitude….You’ve probably tried a lot of it. So have we. And sometimes it
helps, at least for a while. But then the kids are struggling in school or our
partner needs support through a diﬃculty or a new work project lands in our
laps, and we think, I’ll do the self-care thing as soon as I ﬁnish this.
The problem is not that women don’t try. On the contrary, we’re trying all
the time, to do and be all the things everyone demands from us. And we will
try anything—any green smoothie, any deep-breathing exercise, any coloring
book or bath bomb, any retreat or vacation we can shoehorn into our
schedules—to be what our work and our family and our world demand. We
try to put on our own oxygen mask before assisting others. And then along
comes another struggling kid or terrible boss or diﬃcult semester.
The problem is not that we aren’t trying. The problem isn’t even that we
don’t know how. The problem is the world has turned “wellness” into yet
another goal everyone “should” strive for, but only people with time and
money and nannies and yachts and Oprah’s phone number can actually
achieve.
So this book is diﬀerent from anything else you’ll read about burnout.
We’ll ﬁgure out what wellness can look like in your actual real life, and we’ll
confront the barriers that stand between you and your own well-being. We’ll
put those barriers in context, like landmarks on a map, so we can ﬁnd paths
around and over and through them—or sometimes just blow them to
smithereens.

[PDF page 6]

With science.
W ho W e Are and W hy W e W rote Burnout
Emily is a health educator with a PhD and a New York Times bestselling
book, Come as You Are: The Surprising New Science That Will Transform
Your Sex Life. When she was traveling all over talking about that book,
readers kept telling her the most life-changing information in the book wasn’t
the sex science; it was those sections about stress and emotion processing.
When she told her identical twin sister, Amelia, a choral conductor,
Amelia blinked like that was obvious. “Of course. Nobody teaches us how to
feel our feelings. Hell, I was taught. Any conservatory-trained musician learns
to feel feelings singing on stages or standing on podiums. But that didn’t mean
I knew how to do it in the real world. And when I ﬁnally learned, it probably
saved my life,” she said.
“Twice,” she added.
And Emily, recalling how it felt to watch her sister crying in a hospital
gown, said, “We should write a book about that.”
Amelia agreed, saying, “A book about that would’ve made my life a lot
better.”
This is that book.
It turned into a lot more than a book about stress. Above all, it became a
book about connection. We humans are not built to do big things alone, we
are built to work together. That’s what we wrote about, and it’s how we wrote
it.
IT’S TH E EM OTIONAL EXHAU STION
When we told women we were writing a book called Burnout, nobody ever
asked, “What’s burnout?” (Mostly what they said was, “Is it out yet? Can I
read it?”) We all have an intuitive sense of what “burnout” is; we know how it
feels in our bodies and how our emotions crumble in the grip of it. But when
it was ﬁrst coined as a technical term by Herbert Freudenberger in 1975,
“burnout” was deﬁned by three components:

[PDF page 7]

1. emotional exhaustion—the fatigue that comes from caring too
much, for too long;
2. depersonalization—the depletion of empathy, caring, and
compassion; and
3. decreased sense of accomplishment—an unconquerable sense
of futility: feeling that nothing you do makes any diﬀerence.1
And here’s an understatement: Burnout is highly prevalent. Twenty to
thirty percent of teachers in America have moderately high to high levels of
burnout.2 Similar rates are found among university professors and
international humanitarian aid workers.3 Among medical professionals,
burnout can be as high as 52 percent.4 Nearly all the research on burnout is
on professional burnout—speciﬁcally “people who help people,” like teachers
and nurses—but a growing area of research is “parental burnout.”5
In the forty years since the original formulation, research has found it’s the
ﬁrst element in burnout, emotional exhaustion, that’s most strongly linked to
negative impacts on our health, relationships, and work—especially for
women.6
So what exactly is an “emotion,” and how do you exhaust it?
Emotions, at their most basic level, involve the release of neurochemicals
in the brain, in response to some stimulus. You see the person you have a
crush on across the room, your brain releases a bunch of chemicals, and that
triggers a cascade of physiological changes—your heart beats faster, your
hormones shift, and your stomach ﬂutters. You take a deep breath and sigh.
Your facial expression changes; maybe you blush; even the timbre of your
voice becomes warmer. Your thoughts shift to memories of the crush and
fantasies about the future, and you suddenly feel an urge to cross the room
and say hi. Just about every system in your body responds to the chemical and
electrical cascade activated by the sight of the person.
That’s emotion. It’s automatic and instantaneous. It happens everywhere,
and it aﬀects everything. And it’s happening all the time—we feel many
diﬀerent emotions simultaneously, even in response to one stimulus. You may

[PDF page 8]

feel an urge to approach your crush, but also, simultaneously, feel an urge to
turn away and pretend you didn’t notice them.
Left to their own devices, emotions—these instantaneous, whole-body
reactions to some stimulus—will end on their own. Your attention shifts from
your crush to some other topic, and the ﬂush of infatuation eases, until that
certain special someone crosses your mind or your path once more. The same
goes for the jolt of pain you feel when someone is cruel to you or the ﬂash of
disgust when you smell something unpleasant. They just end.
In short, emotions are tunnels. If you go all the way through them, you get to
the light at the end.
Exhaustion happens when we get stuck in an emotion.
We may get stuck simply because we’re constantly being exposed to
situations that activate emotion—our crush is there, all day, every day, even if
only in our thoughts, and so we’re trapped in our own longing. Or we return
to our stressful job every single day. No wonder “helping professions” are so
exhausting—you’re confronted with people in need, all day, day after day. No
wonder parenting is so exhausting—once you’re a parent, you’re never not a
parent. You’re always going through the tunnel.
Sometimes we get stuck because we can’t ﬁnd our way through. The most
diﬃcult feelings—rage, grief, despair, helplessness—may be too treacherous
to move through alone. We get lost and need someone else, a loving presence,
to help us ﬁnd our way.
And sometimes we get stuck because we’re trapped in a place where we
are not free to move through the tunnel.
Many of us are trapped in just this way, because of a problem we call
“Human Giver Syndrome.”
H U MAN GIVER SYNDRO ME
In Down Girl: The Logic of Misogyny, philosopher Kate Manne describes a
system in which one class of people,7 the “human givers,” are expected to
oﬀer their time, attention, aﬀection, and bodies willingly, placidly, to the
other class of people, the “human beings.”8 The implication in these terms is
that human beings have a moral obligation to be or express their humanity,

[PDF page 9]

while human givers have a moral obligation to give their humanity to the
human beings. Guess which one women are.
In day-to-day life, the dynamic is more complicated and subtle, but let’s
imagine the cartoon version: The human givers are the “attentive, loving
subordinates” to the human beings.9 The givers’ role is to give their whole
humanity to the beings, so that the beings can be their full humanity. Givers
are expected to abdicate any resource or power they may happen to acquire
—their jobs, their love, their bodies. Those belong to the beings.
Human givers must, at all times, be pretty, happy, calm, generous, and
attentive to the needs of others, which means they must never be ugly, angry,
upset, ambitious, or attentive to their own needs. Givers are not supposed to
need anything. If they dare to ask for or, God forbid, demand anything, that’s
a violation of their role as a giver and they may be punished. And if a giver
doesn’t obediently and sweetly hand over whatever a being wants, for that,
too, the giver may be punished, shamed, or even destroyed.
If we had set out to design a system to induce burnout in half the
population, we could not have constructed anything more eﬃcient.
Emotional exhaustion happens when we get stuck in an emotion and can’t
move through the tunnel. In Human Giver Syndrome, the giver isn’t allowed
to inconvenience anyone with anything so messy as emotions, so givers are
trapped in a situation where they are not free to move through the tunnel.
They might even be punished for it.
Your body, with its instinct for self-preservation, knows, on some level,
that Human Giver Syndrome is slowly killing you. That’s why you keep trying
mindfulness and green smoothies and self-care trend after self-care trend.
But that instinct for self-preservation is battling a syndrome that insists that
self-preservation is selﬁsh, so your eﬀorts to care for yourself might actually
make things worse, activating even more punishment from the world or from
yourself, because how dare you?
Human Giver Syndrome is our disease.
The book you’re reading is our prescription.

[PDF page 10]

H ow the Book Is O rganized
We’ve divided Burnout into three parts. Part I is “What You Take with You.”
In the Star Wars movie Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back, Luke
Skywalker sees an evil cave. Looking toward the entrance in dread, he asks
his teacher Yoda, “What’s in there?”
Yoda answers, “Only what you take with you.”
This beginning section of the book explains three internal resources that
we carry with us as we take our heroine’s journey: the stress response cycle,
“the Monitor” (the brain mechanism that controls the emotion of frustration),
and meaning in life. Meaning is often misunderstood as “the thing we’ll ﬁnd
at the end of the tunnel,” but it’s not. It’s why we go through the tunnel,
regardless of what we ﬁnd on the other end. (Spoiler alert: meaning is good
for us.)
Which brings us to Part II. We call it “The Real Enemy.”
That’s a reference to The Hunger Games, in which young Katniss Everdeen
is forced into a “game” organized by the dystopian sci-ﬁ government, in
which she has to kill other children.
Her mentor says to her, “Remember who the real enemy is.” It’s not the
people the government wants her to kill, and who are trying to kill her. The
real enemy is the government that set this whole system up in the ﬁrst place.
Can you guess what the enemy is in this book?
[Cue ominous music] The Patriarchy. Ugh.
Most self-help books for women leave this chapter out and instead discuss
only the things readers can control, but that’s like teaching someone the best
winning strategy of a game without mentioning that the game is rigged.
Fortunately, when we understand how the game is rigged, we can start
playing by our own rules.
And then Part III—the thrilling conclusion—is the science of winning the
war against these “real enemies.” It turns out there are concrete, speciﬁc
things we can do each and every day, to grow mighty and conquer the enemy.

[PDF page 11]

We call this part “Wax On, Wax Oﬀ.”
In the original Karate Kid movie, Mr. Miyagi teaches Danny LaRusso
karate by having the kid wax his car.
“Wax on,” says Mr. Miyagi, rotating his palm clockwise. “Wax oﬀ,” he
says, rotating his other palm counterclockwise, and he adds, “Don’t forget to
breathe.” He also has Danny sand the deck, stain the fence, and paint the
house.
Why the repetitive, mundane tasks?
Because in the mundane tasks live the protective gestures that help us grow
strong enough to defend ourselves and the people we love, and to make peace
with our enemies.
“Wax on, wax oﬀ” is what makes you stronger: connection, rest, and self-
compassion.
Throughout the book, you’ll follow the stories of two women: Julie, an
overwhelmed public school teacher whose body will revolt against her,
forcing her to pay attention to it; and Sophie, an engineer who will decide she
is not here for the patriarchy.These women are composites: In the same way a
movie is made of thousands of still images, edited together to tell a story,
they are composed of fragments of dozens of real-life women. We’re using
this technique partly to protect the identities of the real women and partly
because this larger narrative arc more eﬀectively explains the science than
stand-alone vignettes can. The research doesn’t come close to addressing
every woman’s experience, but we hope that these stories will give you that
sense of how each individual’s experience is unique and yet, at the same time,
universal.
And each chapter ends with a “tl;dr” list. Tl;dr is the Internet abbreviation
for “too long; didn’t read.” If you write a ﬁve-hundred-word post on
Facebook or a multiparagraph comment on Instagram, someone may well
reply, “tl;dr.” Our tl;dr lists contain the ideas you can share with your best
friend when she calls you in tears, the facts you can use to disprove myths
when they come up in conversation, and the thoughts we hope come to you
when your racing mind keeps you awake at night.

[PDF page 12]

A CAVEAT O R TW O  ABO U T SCIENCE
In this book, we use science as a tool to help women live better lives. We’ve
turned to diverse domains of science, including aﬀective neuroscience,
psychophysiology, positive psychology, ethology, game theory, computational
biology, and many others. So a few words of caution about science.
Science is the best idea humanity has ever had. It’s a systematic way of
exploring the nature of reality, of testing and proving or disproving ideas. But
it’s important to remember that science is ultimately a specialized way of
being wrong. That is, every scientist tries to be (a) slightly less wrong than the
scientists who came before them, by proving that something we thought was
true actually isn’t, and (b) wrong in a way that can be tested and proven,
which results in the next scientist being slightly less wrong. Research is the
ongoing process of learning new things that show us a little more of what’s
true, which inevitably reveals how wrong we used to be, and it is never
“ﬁnished.” So whenever you read a headline like “New Study Shows…” or
“Latest Research Finds…,” read with skepticism. One study does not equal
proof of anything. In Burnout, we’ve aimed to use ideas that have been
established over multiple decades and reinforced by multiple approaches.
Still, science doesn’t oﬀer perfect truth, only the best available truth. Science,
in a sense, is not an exact science.
A second caveat: Social science is generally done by measuring lots of
people and assessing the average measurement of all those people, because
people vary. Just because something is true about a group of people—like,
American women are, on average, ﬁve feet four inches tall—doesn’t mean it’s
true about any speciﬁc individual within that group. So if you meet an
American woman who isn’t ﬁve foot four, there’s nothing wrong with her,
she’s just diﬀerent from the average. And there’s nothing wrong with the
science, either; it’s true that women are, on average, ﬁve foot four—but that
tells us nothing in particular about any speciﬁc woman we may meet. So if
you read some science in this book that describes “women” but doesn’t
describe you, that doesn’t mean the science is wrong and it doesn’t mean
there’s something wrong with you. People vary, and they change. Science is
too blunt an instrument to capture every woman’s situation.
A third caveat: Science is often expensive, and who pays for it can
inﬂuence the outcome and whether or not the results are published. As

[PDF page 13]

enthusiastic as we are about evidence-based practices, it’s important to
remember where that evidence comes from and why we might not see
contrary evidence.10
Science has a fourth speciﬁc limitation worth mentioning in a book about
women: When a research article says it studied “women,” it almost always
means it studied people who were born in a body that made all the grown-ups
around them say, “It’s a girl!” and then that person was raised as a girl and
grew into an adult who felt comfortable in the psychological identity and
social role of “woman.” There are plenty of people who identify as women
for whom at least one of those things is not true, and there are plenty of
people who don’t identify as women, for whom one or more of those things is
true. In this book, when we use the word “woman,” we mostly mean “people
who identify as women,” but it’s important to remember that when we
describe the science, we’re limited to the women who were identiﬁed at birth
and raised as women, because that’s mostly who has been studied. (Sorry.)
So. We try to be as science-based as we can be, but we’re aware of its
limits.
That’s where the art comes in.
As science ﬁction author Cassandra Clare writes, “Fiction is truth, even if
it is not fact.” This is what storytelling is for—and in fact research has found
that people understand science better when it’s communicated through
storytelling! So side by side with the neuroscience and computational biology,
we’ll talk about Disney princesses, sci-ﬁ dystopias, pop music, and more,
because story goes where science can’t.
TH E OW L AND TH E CH EESE
Here’s a real study that real scientists really conducted:11
Research participants were given some mazes—just lines on paper—and
instructed that their goal was to get the cartoon mouse from one side of the
maze to the other. In one version of the maze, a cartoon owl loomed over the
page, hunting the mouse. In another version, a morsel of cheese awaited the
mouse at its destination.
Which group completed the maze faster, the ones who were moving
toward the cheese, or the ones who were ﬂeeing from the owl?

[PDF page 14]

The cheese group. Participants completed more mazes, more quickly,
when their imaginations were propelled toward a reward even as mild as
cartoon cheese, than when running away from an uncomfortable state even as
subtle as the threat of a cartoon owl.
It makes perfect sense when you think about it. If you’re moving toward a
speciﬁc, desired goal, your attention and eﬀorts are focused on that single
outcome. But if you’re moving away from a threat, it hardly matters where
you end up, as long as it’s somewhere safe from the threat.
The moral of the story is: We thrive when we have a positive goal to move
toward, not just a negative state we’re trying to move away from. If we hate
where we are, our ﬁrst instinct often is to run aimlessly away from the owl of
our present circumstances, which may lead us somewhere not much better
than where we started. We need something positive to move toward. We need
the cheese.
The “cheese” of Burnout isn’t just feeling less overwhelmed and exhausted,
or no longer worrying whether you’re doing “enough.” The cheese is growing
mighty, feeling strong enough to cope with all the owls and mazes and
anything else the world throws at you.
Our promise to you is this: Wherever you are in your life, whether you’re
struggling in a pit of despair and searching for a way out, or you’re doing
great and want tools to grow mightier, you will ﬁnd something important in
these pages. We’ll show you science that proves you’re normal and you’re not
alone. We’ll oﬀer evidence-based tools to use when you’re struggling and that
you can share with people you love when they’re struggling. We’ll surprise
you with science that contradicts the “commonsense” knowledge you’ve spent
your whole life believing. And we’ll inspire and empower you to create
positive change in your own life and the lives of those you love.
Writing this book did all of these things for us—showed us we’re normal
and we’re not alone, taught us important skills to use when we’re struggling,
and surprised us and empowered us. It has already changed our lives, and we
think it will change yours, too.

[PDF page 15]

PART I
 
W hat You Take with You

[PDF page 16]

1
COM PLETE THE CYCLE
“I’ve decided to start selling drugs so I can quit my job.”
This is how Amelia’s friend Julie recently answered the question
“How are you?” the Saturday before the new school year started.
She was kidding, of course…except she wasn’t. She’s a middle
school teacher. Her burnout had reached an intensity where
merely the anticipation of the start of the ﬁrst semester had
activated a level of dread that left her reaching for the box of
Chardonnay by 2 P.M.
Nobody likes to think of their kids’ middle school teacher as
burned out, embittered, and day-drinking, but she’s not alone.
Burnout—with its cynicism, sense of helplessness, and, above all,
emotional exhaustion—is startlingly ubiquitous.
“I saw that story about the teacher who showed up on the ﬁrst
day of school drunk with no pants, and I thought, ‘There but for
the grace of God go I,’ ” Julie told Amelia, from the bottom of her
ﬁrst glass.
“Dread is anxiety on steroids,” Amelia said, remembering her
own days teaching middle school music, “and the anxiety comes
from the accumulation, day after day, of stress that never ends.”
“Yes,” Julie declared, ﬁlling her glass again.
“The thing about teaching is, you can’t ever get rid of the causes
of the stress,” Amelia said. “And I don’t mean the kids.”
“Right?” Julie agreed. “The kids are why I’m there. It’s the
administration and the paperwork and that crap.”

[PDF page 17]

“And you can’t get rid of those kinds of stressors,” Amelia said,
“but you can get rid of the stress itself, when you know how to
complete the stress response cycle.”
“Yes,” Julie said again, emphatically. Then she said, “What do
you mean, ‘complete the cycle’?”
—
This chapter is the answer to Julie’s question, and it might be the most
important idea in the book: Dealing with your stress is a separate process
from dealing with the things that cause your stress. To deal with your stress,
you have to complete the cycle.
“Stress”
Let’s start by diﬀerentiating our stress from our stressors.
Stressors are what activate the stress response in your body. They can be
anything you see, hear, smell, touch, taste, or imagine could do you harm.
There are external stressors: work, money, family, time, cultural norms and
expectations, experiences of discrimination, and so on. And there are less
tangible, internal stressors: self-criticism, body image, identity, memories,
and The Future. In diﬀerent ways and to diﬀerent degrees, all of these things
may be interpreted by your body as potential threats.
Stress is the neurological and physiological shift that happens in your body
when you encounter one of these threats. It’s an evolutionarily adaptive
response that helps us cope with things like, say, being chased by a lion or
charged by a hippo.1 When your brain notices the lion (or hippo), it activates
a generic “stress response,” a cascade of neurological and hormonal activity
that initiates physiological changes to help you survive: epinephrine acts
instantly to push blood into your muscles, glucocorticoids keep you going,
and endorphins help you ignore how uncomfortable all of this is. Your heart
beats faster, so your blood pumps harder, so your blood pressure increases
and you breathe more quickly (measures of cardiovascular functioning are a

[PDF page 18]

common way researchers study stress).2 Your muscles tense; your sensitivity
to pain diminishes; your attention is alert and vigilant, focusing on short-term,
here-and-now thinking; your senses are heightened; your memory shifts to
channel its functioning to the narrow band of experience and knowledge most
immediately relevant to this stressor. Plus, to maximize your body’s eﬃciency
in this state, your other organ systems get deprioritized: Your digestion slows
down and your immune functioning shifts (measures of immune function are
another common way researchers study stress).3 Ditto growth and tissue
repair, as well as reproductive functioning. Your entire body and mind change
in response to the perceived threat.
And so here comes the lion. You are ﬂooded with stress response. What do
you do?
You run.
You see, this complex, multisystem response has one primary goal: to
move oxygen and fuel into your muscles, in anticipation of the need to
escape. Any process not relevant to that task is postponed. As Robert
Sapolsky puts it, “For us vertebrates, the core of the stress-response is built
around the fact that your muscles are going to work like crazy.”4
So you run.
And then?
Well, then there are only two possible outcomes: either you get eaten by
the lion (or trampled by the hippo—in either case, none of the rest of this
matters) or else you escape! You survive! You run back to your village, the
lion chasing you all the while, and you shout for help! Everyone comes out
and helps you slaughter the lion—you’re saved! Yay! You love your friends
and family! You’re grateful to be alive! The sun seems to shine more brightly
as you relax into the certain knowledge that your body is a safe place to be.
Together, the village cooks a lot of the lion and shares a communal feast, and
then you all bury the parts you can’t use, in an honoring ceremony. Hand in
hand with the people you love, you take a deep, relaxing breath and give
thanks to the lion for its sacriﬁce.
Stress response cycle complete, and we all live happily ever after.

[PDF page 19]

Just Because You’ve Dealt with the Stressor Doesn’t M ean You’ve
Dealt with the Stress Itself
Our stress response is beautifully ﬁtted to the environment where it evolved.
The behavior that dealt with a lion was the behavior that completed the stress
response cycle. And that makes it easy to assume that it’s the elimination of
the lion—the cause of the stress—that completed the cycle.
But no.
Suppose you were running away from the lion, when it’s struck by
lightning! You turn and see the dead lion, but do you suddenly feel peaceful
and relaxed? No. You stop, puzzled, heart pounding, eyes darting in search of
the threat. Your body still wants to run or ﬁght or hide in a cave and cry. The
threat may have been dealt with by an act of God, but you’re left still needing
to do something to let your body know you’re safe. The stress response cycle
needs to complete, and just eliminating the stressor isn’t enough to do that.
So maybe you run back to your village and breathlessly tell your tribe what
happened, and you all jump up and down and cheer and thank God for the
lightning bolt.
Or a modern example: Suppose the lion charges—it’s coming right for you!
Adrenaline and cortisol and glycogen, oh my! And so, thinking quickly, you
grab your riﬂe and shoot the lion, to save your own life. Bang. The lion drops
dead.
Now what? The threat is gone, but again your body is still in full action
mode, because you haven’t done anything your body recognizes as a cue that
you are safe. Your body is stuck in the middle of the stress response. Just
telling yourself, “You’re safe now; calm down,” doesn’t help. Even seeing the
dead lion isn’t enough. You have to do something that signals to your body
that you are safe, or else you’ll stay in that state, with neurochemicals and
hormones degrading but never shifting into relaxation. Your digestive system,
immune system, cardiovascular system, musculoskeletal system, and
reproductive system never get the signal that they’re safe.
But wait, there’s more:
Suppose the stressor is not a lion, but some jerk at work. This jerk will
never be a threat to our lives, he’s just a pain in the ass. He says some jerky

[PDF page 20]

thing at a meeting, and you get a similar ﬂood of adrenaline and cortisol and
glycogen, oh my.5 But you have to sit there in that meeting and be “nice.”
“Socially appropriate.” It would only escalate the situation if you vaulted
across the table and scratched his eyes out, as your physiology is telling you
to do. Instead, you have a quiet, socially appropriate, highly functional
meeting with his supervisor, in which you recruit the supervisor’s support in
intervening the next time the jerk says another jerky thing.
Congratulations!
But addressing the cause of the stress doesn’t mean you’ve addressed the
stress itself. Your body is soaked in stress juice, just waiting for some cue
that you are now safe from the potential threat and can relax into celebration.
And it happens day after day…after day.
Let’s think about what this does to just one system, the cardiovascular:
Chronically activated stress response means chronically increased blood
pressure, which is like constantly turning a ﬁrehose on in your blood vessels,
when those vessels were designed by evolution to handle only a gently ﬂowing
stream. The increased wear and tear on your blood vessels leads to increased
risk for heart disease. That’s how chronic stress leads to life-threatening
illness.
And this happens, remember, in every organ system in your body.
Digestion. Immune functioning. Hormones. We are not built to live in that
state. If we get stuck there, the physiological response intended to save us can
instead slowly kill us.
This is the upside-down world we live in: in most situations in the modern,
post-industrial West, the stress itself will kill you faster than the stressor will
—unless you do something to complete the stress response cycle. While
you’re managing the day’s stressors, your body is managing the day’s stress,
and it is absolutely essential to your well-being—the way sleeping and eating
are absolutely essential—that you give your body the resources it needs to
complete the stress response cycles that have been activated.
Before we talk about how to do that, let’s talk about why we aren’t already
doing it.

[PDF page 21]

W hy W e G et Stuck
There are lots of reasons why the cycle might not complete. These are the
three we see most often:
1. Chronic Stressor → Chronic Stress. Sometimes your brain activates a
stress response, you do the thing it says, and it doesn’t change the situation:
“Run!” it says, when you’re confronted by a terrifying project—speaking in
front of a group of your peers, say, or writing a giant report or interviewing
for a job.
So you “run,” in your twenty-ﬁrst-century way: when you get home that
day, you put on Beyoncé and dance it out for half an hour.
“We escaped the lion!” your brain says, breathless and grinning. “Self high
ﬁve!” And you’re rewarded with all kinds of feel-good brain chemicals.
And then tomorrow…the terrifying project is still there.
“Run!” your brain says again.
And the cycle begins again.
We get stuck in the stress response, because we’re stuck in a stress-
activating situation. That’s not always bad—it’s only bad when the stress
outpaces our capacity to process it. Which, alas, is a lot of the time,
because…
2. Social Appropriateness. Sometimes the brain activates a stress response
and you can’t do the thing it’s trying to tell you to do:
“Run!” it says, pumping out adrenaline for you.
“I can’t!” you say. “I’m in the middle of an exam!”
Or, “Punch that asshole in the face!” it says, dumping glucocorticoids into
your bloodstream.
“I can’t!” you say. “He’s my client!”
So you sit politely and smile benignly and do your best, while your body
stews in stress juice, waiting for you to do something.
And sometimes the world tells you it’s wrong to feel that stress—wrong for
so many reasons, in so many ways. It’s not nice; it’s weak; it’s impolite.
Many of us were raised to be “good girls,” to be “nice.” Fear and anger and
other uncomfortable emotions can cause distress in the people around you, so

[PDF page 22]

it’s not nice to feel those things in front of other people. We smile and ignore
our feelings, because our feelings matter less than the other person’s.
And also it’s weak to feel those feelings, our culture has taught us. You’re a
smart, strong woman, so when you’re walking down the street and a guy
shouts, “Nice tits!” you tell yourself to ignore it. You tell yourself you’re not
in danger, it’s irrational to feel angry or afraid, and anyway, that guy isn’t
worth it, he doesn’t matter.
Meanwhile, your brain shouts, “Gross!” and makes you walk faster.
“What?” the guy who isn’t worth it calls after you. “Can’t you take a
compliment?”
“Just ignore it,” you tell yourself, swallowing the adrenaline. “You’re too
strong to be aﬀected by this.”
But it’s not just that it’s not nice, and it’s not just that it’s weak, it’s that it’s
impolite, we’re taught. When your cousin posts a misogynistic comment on
Facebook, you could YELL AT HIM FOR REPEATING NONSENSE
THAT IS NOT MERELY FACTUALLY INCORRECT BUT ALSO
MORALLY WRONG OMFG I CAN’T BELIEVE I EVEN STILL HAVE
TO SAY THESE THINGS. Then he—and probably several other people—
will respond that you might have a point, but he can’t listen to you when
you’re so shrill. So angry. You need to make your point more politely if you
want to be taken seriously.
Be nice, be strong, be polite. No feelings for you.
3. It’s Safer. Is there a strategy for dealing with, say, street harassment, that
deals with both the situation and the stress caused by the situation? Sure.
Turn around and slap that guy in the face. But then what? Will he suddenly
realize that street harassment is bad and thus stop doing it? Probably not.
More likely, the situation will escalate and he’ll hit you, in which case it just
got way more dangerous. Sometimes walking away is the win. Smiling and
being nice, ignoring it and telling yourself it doesn’t matter—these are
survival strategies. Use them with pride. Just don’t forget that these survival
strategies do not deal with the stress itself. They postpone your body’s need to
complete the cycle; they don’t replace it.
—

[PDF page 23]

So many ways to deny, ignore, or suppress your stress response! For all these
reasons and more, most of us are walking around with decades of incomplete
stress response cycles simmering away in our chemistry, just waiting for a
chance to complete.
And then there’s freeze.
Freeze
We’ve been talking about the stress response in the familiar terms of “ﬁght or
ﬂight.” When you feel threatened, the brain does a split-second assessment to
determine which response is more likely to result in your survival. Flight
happens when your brain notices a threat and decides that you’re more likely
to survive by trying to escape. That’s what happens when you run from a lion.
Fight happens when your brain decides you’re more likely to survive the
threat by trying to conquer it. From a biological point of view, ﬁght and ﬂight
are essentially the same thing. Flight is fear—avoidance—whereas ﬁght is
anger—approach—but they’re both the “GO!” stress response of the
sympathetic nervous system. They tell you to do something.
Freeze is special. Freeze happens when the brain assesses the threat and
decides you’re too slow to run and too small to ﬁght, and so your best hope
for survival is to “play dead” until the threat goes away or someone comes
along to help you. Freeze is your last-ditch stress response, reserved for
threats that the brain perceives as life-threatening, when ﬁght or ﬂight don’t
stand a chance. In the middle of the gas pedal of stress response, your brain
slams on the brakes—the parasympathetic nervous system swamping the
sympathetic—and you shut down.
Imagine you’re a gazelle running away from a lion. You’re midﬂight, full of
adrenaline—but you feel the lion’s teeth chomp into your hip. What do you
do? You can’t run anymore—the lion has hold of you. You can’t ﬁght—the
lion is much stronger. So your nervous system slams on the brakes. You
collapse and play dead. That’s freeze.
You don’t have to know about freeze in order for your brain to choose it,
but if you don’t know that freeze exists, you may think about a circumstance

[PDF page 24]

where you were unsafe and wonder why you didn’t kick and scream, why you
didn’t ﬁght or run—why, in fact, you felt as if you couldn’t scream or kick or
run. The reason is that you really couldn’t. Your brain was trying to keep you
alive in the face of a threat that seemed unsurvivable, so it slammed on the
brakes in a last-ditch attempt to do that.
And you know what? It worked. Here you are. Alive and reading a book
about stress. Hello! We’re really glad you’re here. We’re grateful to your brain
for keeping you alive.
“THE FEELS”
Our culture gives us a lot of ways to describe what it feels like
when your brain chooses the “G o!” stress responses. W hen
your brain chooses ght, you may feel irritated, annoyed,
frustrated, angry, irate, or enraged. W hen it chooses ight, we
have words to describe that feeling: unsure, worried, anxious,
scared, frightened, or terried. But what are the words that
describe the emotion of “freeze”? W ords that might feel right:
Shut down. Numb. Immobilized. Disconnected. Petried. The very
word sympathetic means “with emotion,” while parasympathetic
—the system that controls freeze—means “beyond emotion.”
You may feel disengaged from the world, sluggish, like you
don’t care or nothing matters. You feel…outside.
If we don’t have a good word to describe the experience of
freeze, we really don’t have a good word to describe what
comes next:
After a gazelle freezes in response to a lion attack, the lion,
feeling smug, wanders oﬀ to get her cubs so they can feed on
the gazelle. And that’s when the magic happens: Once the
threat is gone, the brake gradually eases oﬀ, and the gazelle
begins to shake and shudder. All the adrenaline and cortisol
built up in her bloodstream get purged through this process,
the same way running to safety purges those chemicals.

[PDF page 25]

It happens in all mammals. One woman, when she learned
about freeze, told us, “So that’s what happened to a cat I
accidentally hit with my car—she was just lying there and I was
terried she was dead; I felt terrible. Then she started twitching
and shaking and I thought she was having a seizure, until it was
like she woke up…and then ran away.”
It happens to humans, too. People have told us, “That
happened to my friend, when she was coming out from under
anesthesia after surgery.”
And, “M y kid went through that in the emergency room.”
And, “W hen I was coming to terms with a trauma I
experienced, sometimes my body would go into this state
where I felt out of control, and it scared me because I felt out
of control during the trauma itself. Now I know it was actually
my body taking care of me; it was part of my healing.”
W e don’t have words for the experience of having the brake
come oﬀ—the shaking, shuddering, muscle-stretching,
involuntary response that is often accompanied by waves of
rage, panic, and shame. If you don’t know what it is, it can feel
scary. You might try to ght it or control it. That’s why it’s so
important that we give it a name: W e call it “the Feels,” and it’s
nothing to fear. It’s a normal, healthy part of completing the
cycle, a physiological reaction that will end on its own, usually
lasting just a few minutes. Feels usually happen in extreme cases
where the stress response cycle is interrupted suddenly and not
allowed to complete. It’s part of the healing process following a
traumatic event or long-term, intense stress.
Trust your body. The sensations may bring awareness of
their origins, or they may not; doesn’t matter. Awareness and
insight are not required in order for the Feels to move through
you and out of you. Crying for no apparent reason? G reat! Just
notice any apparently causeless emotions or sensations or
trembling and say, “Ah. There’s some Feels.”

[PDF page 26]

The M ost Eﬃcient W ay to Complete the Cycle
When you’re being chased by a lion, what do you do?
You run.
When you’re stressed out by the bureaucracy and hassle of living in the
twenty-ﬁrst century, what do you do?
You run.
Or swim.
Or dance around your living room, singing along to Beyoncé, or sweat it
out in a Zumba class, or do literally anything that moves your body enough to
get you breathing deeply.
For how long?
Between twenty and sixty minutes a day does it for most folks. And it
should be most days—after all, you experience stress most days, so you
should complete the stress response cycle most days, too. But even just
standing up from your chair, taking a deep breath, and tensing all your
muscles for twenty seconds, then shaking it out with a big exhale, is an
excellent start.
Remember, your body has no idea what “ﬁling your taxes” or “resolving an
interpersonal conﬂict through rational problem-solving” means. It knows,
though, what jumping up and down means. Speak its language—and its
language is body language.
You know how everyone says exercise is good for you? That it helps with
stress and improves your health and mood and intelligence and basically you
should deﬁnitely get some?6 This is why. Physical activity is what tells your
brain you have successfully survived the threat and now your body is a safe
place to live. Physical activity is the single most eﬃcient strategy for completing
the stress response cycle.

[PDF page 27]

Other W ays to Complete the Cycle
Physical activity—literally any movement of your body—is your ﬁrst line of
attack in the battle against burnout. But it’s not the only thing that works to
complete the stress response cycle—far from it! Here are six other evidence-
based strategies:
Breathing. Deep, slow breaths downregulate the stress response—
especially when the exhalation is long and slow and goes all the way to the
end of the breath, so that your belly contracts. Breathing is most eﬀective
when your stress isn’t that high, or when you just need to siphon oﬀ the very
worst of the stress so that you can get through a diﬃcult situation, after which
you’ll do something more hardcore. Also, if you’re living with the aftermath
of trauma, simply breathing deeply is the gentlest way to begin unlocking
from the trauma, which makes it a great place to start. A simple, practical
exercise is to breathe in to a slow count of ﬁve, hold that breath for ﬁve, then
exhale for a slow count of ten, and pause for another count of ﬁve. Do that
three times—just one minute and ﬁfteen seconds of breathing—and see how
you feel.
Positive Social Interaction. Casual but friendly social interaction is the ﬁrst
external sign that the world is a safe place. Most of us expect we’ll be happier
if, say, our seatmate on a train leaves us alone, in mutual silence; turns out,
people experience greater well-being if they’ve had a polite, casual chat with
their seatmate.7 People with more acquaintances are happier.8 Just go buy a
cup of coﬀee and say “Nice day” to the barista. Compliment the lunch lady’s
earrings. Reassure your brain that the world is a safe, sane place, and not all
people suck. It helps!
Laughter. Laughing together—and even just reminiscing about the times
we’ve laughed together—increases relationship satisfaction.9 We don’t mean
social or “posed” laughter, we mean belly laughs—deep, impolite, helpless
laughter. When we laugh, says neuroscientist Sophie Scott, we use an “ancient
evolutionary system that mammals have evolved to make and maintain social
bonds and regulate emotions.”10
Aﬀection. When friendly chitchat with colleagues doesn’t cut it, when
you’re too stressed out for laughter, deeper connection with a loving presence

[PDF page 28]

is called for. Most often, this comes from some loving and beloved person
who likes, respects, and trusts you, whom you like, respect, and trust. It
doesn’t have to be physical aﬀection, though physical aﬀection is great; a
warm hug, in a safe and trusting context, can do as much to help your body
feel like it has escaped a threat as jogging a couple of miles, and it’s a heck of
a lot less sweaty.
One example of aﬀection is the “six-second kiss” advice from relationship
researcher John Gottman. Every day, he suggests, kiss your partner for six
seconds. That’s one six-second kiss, mind you, not six one-second kisses. Six
seconds is, if you think about it, a potentially awkwardly long kiss. But there’s
a reason for it: Six seconds is too long to kiss someone you resent or dislike,
and it’s far too long to kiss someone with whom you feel unsafe. Kissing for
six seconds requires that you stop and deliberately notice that you like this
person, that you trust them, and that you feel aﬀection for them. By noticing
those things, the kiss tells your body that you are safe with your tribe.
Another example: Hug someone you love and trust for twenty full seconds,
while both of you are standing over your own centers of balance. Most of the
time when we hug people, it’s a quick, lean-in type hug, or it might be a
longer hug where you each lean on each other, so that if one person lets go,
the other person would fall over. Instead, support your own weight, as your
partner does the same, and put your arms around each other. Hold on. The
research suggests a twenty-second hug can change your hormones, lower your
blood pressure and heart rate, and improve mood, all of which are reﬂected
in the post-hug increase in the social-bonding hormone oxytocin.11
Like a long, mindful kiss, a twenty-second hug can teach your body that
you are safe; you have escaped the lion and arrived home, safe and sound, to
the people you love.
Of course, it doesn’t have to be precisely twenty seconds. What matters is
that you feel the shift of the cycle completing. Therapist Suzanne Iasenza
describes it as “hugging until relaxed.”
Happily, our capacity to complete the cycle with aﬀection doesn’t stop with
other human beings. Just petting a cat for a few minutes can lower your blood
pressure, and pet owners often describe their attachment to their pets as more
supportive than their human relationships.12 No wonder people who walk

[PDF page 29]

their dogs get more exercise and feel better than people who don’t—they’re
getting exercise and aﬀection at the same time.13 And for people whose
experiences have taught them that no one is trustworthy, therapies with
horses, dogs, and other animals can open a door to the power of connection.
Our capacity to complete the cycle with aﬀection doesn’t even stop at
connection with mundane life on Earth. Often when researchers examine the
role of spirituality in a person’s well-being, they talk about “meaning in
life”—which is so important we’ve got a whole chapter on it (chapter 3)—or
about the social support provided by fellow members of a religious
community. But a spiritual connection is also about feeling safe, loved, and
supported by a higher power. In short, it’s about feeling connected to an
invisible yet intensely tangible tribe.14
A Big Ol’ Cry. Anyone who says “Crying doesn’t solve anything” doesn’t
know the diﬀerence between dealing with the stress and dealing with the
situation that causes the stress. Have you had the experience of just barely
making it inside before you slam the door behind you and burst into tears for
ten minutes? Then you wipe your nose, sigh a big sigh, and feel relieved from
the weight of whatever made you cry? You may not have changed the
situation that caused the stress, but you completed the cycle.
Have a favorite tearjerker movie that makes you cry every time? You know
exactly when to grab the tissues and sniﬀ, “I love this part!” Going through
that emotion with the characters allows your body to go through it, too. The
story guides you through the complete emotional cycle.
Creative Expression. Engaging in creative activities today leads to more
energy, excitement, and enthusiasm tomorrow.15
Why? How? Like sports, the arts—including painting, sculpture, music,
theater, and storytelling in all forms—create a context that tolerates, even
encourages, big emotions. In the ﬁrst ﬂush of romantic love, for example, all
those songs on the radio suddenly make sense! And those songs keep us
company even when our friends are rolling their eyes and sick of hearing
about how in love we are. And when we are heartbroken, there’s a playlist to
lead us through the tunnel of our grief and keep us company as we move
through it, to a place of peace. In this way, literary, visual, and performing
arts of all kinds give us the chance to celebrate and move through big

[PDF page 30]

emotions. It’s like a cultural loophole in a society that tells us to be “nice” and
not make waves. Take advantage of the loophole.
Writers and painters and creators of all kinds have said the same thing one
Nashville songwriter told us: “Looking back at my very ﬁrst songs, it’s
completely obvious that I was dealing with my past, and trying to process my
trauma history into something meaningful. At the time, I was completely in
denial—I didn’t even know I had pain. But writing songs helped me feel what
my mind had hidden from me. My songs were a safe place to put what I
couldn’t deal with otherwise.”16
Sophie is an engineer and a Star Trek geek and a lot of other
things, but she is not an athlete. In high school, people saw a six-
foot-one black girl and told her she should play basketball, and
she told them where they could put their basketball. She hates
exercise. She will not exercise. In fact, if she ever tries to exercise,
after a few days she inevitably comes down with something or is
injured, or a project comes up that means she doesn’t have time
anymore. She can’t exercise. Can’t. Hates it, can’t do it, won’t do it.
So when Emily visited her oﬃce to lead a lunchtime seminar
about stress and said, “Exercise is good for you,” Sophie
approached her afterward.
“You don’t understand, Emily. It’s boring and painful and every
time I do it, something goes wrong. I can’t, I won’t, I don’t want to,
just no. No. I’m not going to exercise. I don’t care how good it is
for my stress.”
Not everyone is a natural exerciser. But the research is so
unambiguous that exercise is good for you that, as a health
educator, Emily has searched for ways to support people who
can’t exercise or hate exercise or just don’t exercise, for whatever
reason. When she looked at the research, to her astonishment,
most of the conclusions said things like “Join a team sport” or
“Make it a hobby, not just exercise!” In other words, the advice
said, “Find a way to enjoy exercise!” Which is good advice, but not
for someone with chronic pain or illness, injury or disability, or
someone like Sophie who will. Not. Exercise.

[PDF page 31]

But then Emily found a remarkable branch of research on
body-based therapies, whose results she applies to folks like
Sophie. Here’s what Emily suggested.
“Okay, so just lie in bed—”
“My favorite sport,” Sophie said.
“Then just progressively tense and release every muscle in your
body, starting with your feet and ending with your face. Tense
them hard, hard, hard, for a ssslllooowww count of ten. Make
sure you spend extra time tensing the places where you carry your
stress.”
“Shoulders,” Sophie said instantly.
“Super! And while you do that, you visualize, really clearly and
viscerally, what it feels like to beat the living daylights out of
whatever stressor you’ve encountered.”
“Okay,” Sophie said with some enthusiasm.
“Imagine it really clearly, though—that matters a lot. You
should notice your body responding, like your heart beating faster
and your ﬁsts clenching, until you reach a satisfying sense of—”
“Victory,” Sophie said. “I got this.”
She did. And strange things started to happen. Sometimes, when
she was doing the muscle-tension activity, she felt inexplicable
waves of frustration and anger. Occasionally, she’d cry.
Sometimes her body would seem to take over and shake and
shudder in strange ways, as if she were possessed.
She emailed Emily about it.
“Totally normal,” Emily assured her. “That’s your baggage
unpacking itself. All those incomplete stress response cycles that
have built up inside you are ﬁnally releasing. Trust your body.”
—
There are so many ways to complete the cycle, it’s not possible to catalogue
all of them here. Physical activity, aﬀection, laughter, creative expression,

[PDF page 32]

and even just breathing have something in common as strategies, though: you
have to do something.
One thing we know for sure doesn’t work: just telling yourself that
everything is okay now. Completing the cycle isn’t an intellectual decision; it’s
a physiological shift. Just as you don’t tell your heart to continue beating or
your digestion to continue churning, the cycle doesn’t complete by deliberate
choice. You give your body what it needs, and allow it to do what it does, in
the time that it requires.
How Do You Know You’ve Completed the Cycle?
It’s like knowing when you’re full after a meal, or like knowing when you’ve
had an orgasm. Your body tells you, and it’s easier for some people to
recognize than others. You might experience it as a shift in mood or mental
state or physical tension, as you breathe more deeply and your thoughts relax.
For some people, it’s as obvious as knowing that they’re breathing. That’s
how it is for Emily. Long before she knew about the science, she knew that
when she felt stressed and tense and terrible, she could go for a run or for a
bike ride and at the end of it she would feel better. Even on the days when
she looked at her shoes and thought, Ugh, I just don’t want to, she knew that
on the other side of those shoes and that run or that ride was peace. Once, she
even cried at the top of a hill in southeastern Pennsylvanian farm country,
breathing hard and marveling at the smell of cows and the glow of sunlight on
the pavement, as the gears of her bike whirred under her. She has always
been able to feel it intuitively, the shift inside her body.
How does it feel?
It’s a gear shift—a slip of the chain to a smaller gear, and all of a sudden
the wheels are spinning more freely. It’s a relaxation in her muscles and a
deepening of her breath.
The more regularly she exercises, the more easily she gets there. If she has
let the stress accumulate inside her for days or weeks, one workout won’t get
her all the way there. She’ll feel better at the end of a run, but not done. If
you’ve spent a long time accumulating incomplete stress response cycles

[PDF page 33]

inside your body, you may have this experience, too. When you begin
practicing strategies to complete the cycle, you’ll feel only some relief at ﬁrst,
not necessarily the full relaxation of completion. That’s okay, too.
For others—like Amelia—recognizing when the cycle completes is not so
intuitive. She was in her therapist’s oﬃce, feeling anxious, the ﬁrst time she
noticed it happening. The therapist asked her to describe what her anxiety felt
like, and Amelia waxed poetic for about four minutes, talking about the
tension in her shoulders and the heat in her neck and the quivering in her hair
follicles, then stopped to breathe.
“And how do you feel now?” the therapist asked.
“Um. I…I don’t know. I can’t ﬁnd it anymore. I think it’s just…gone?”
“Yeah. That’s how it works. If anxiety starts, it ends.”
“It just ends?”
“Yeah. If you let it, it just ends.”
We asked a group of therapists how they could tell they had completed the
cycle. One therapist talked not about herself, but about her young daughter.
When her daughter came to her in distress, she would hold her, as a mother
does, and watch her face as she cried. Gradually, the taut muscles in the little
girl’s face and body would soften, and she would give a great big shuddering
sigh, and then she’d be able to talk about what had happened to cause the
distress. The big sigh was the signal that her little body had made the shift.17
Don’t worry if you’re not sure you can recognize when you’ve “completed”
the cycle. Especially if you’ve spent a lot of years—like, your whole life,
maybe—holding on to your worry or anger, you’ve probably got a whole lot
of accumulated stress response cycles spinning their engines, waiting for their
turn, so it’s going to take a while before you get through the backlog. All you
need to do is recognize that you feel incrementally better than you felt before
you started. You can notice that something in your body has changed, shifted
in the direction of peace.
“If I was at an eight on the stress scale when I started, I’m at a four now,”
you can say. And that’s pretty great.

[PDF page 34]

The Practical Advice
The “how to” here is very simple:
First, ﬁnd what works. It would be convenient if we could just tell you
which strategy will work best for you, but you’ll probably ﬁnd that diﬀerent
strategies work better on diﬀerent days, and sometimes the strategy that
works best isn’t practical day to day, so you need a backup strategy. You can
probably already think of a few things that feel right, but experiment, then
schedule that stuﬀ into your day. Put it in your calendar. Thirty minutes of
anything that works for you: exercise, meditation, creative expression,
aﬀection, etc. Because you experience stress every day, you have to build
completing the cycle into every day. Make it a priority, like your life depends
on it. Because it does.
Remember, Emily intuitively understood completing the cycle from early
adolescence, while Amelia, genetically identical and raised in the same
household, didn’t even begin to understand until after years of therapy, two
hospitalizations for stress-induced inﬂammation, formal meditation training,
and explicit instruction from her health educator sister. So we know
everybody’s diﬀerent. But with practice, you’ll begin to notice what diﬀerent
stress levels feel like in your body, and you’ll get a sense of which days
require more or less time or intensity to complete the cycle.
—
For a lot of people, the most diﬃcult thing about “completing the cycle” is
that it almost always requires that they stop dealing with whatever caused the
stress, step away from that situation, and turn instead toward their own body
and emotions.
By this point in the chapter, you know that dealing with the stressor and
dealing with the stress are two diﬀerent processes, and you have to do both.
You have to, or else your stress will gradually erode your well-being until
your body and mind break down.

[PDF page 35]

Signs You Need to Deal with the Stress, Even If It M eans Ignoring
the Stressor
Your brain and body exhibit predictable signs when your stress level is
elevated, and these serve as reliable cues that indicate you need to deal with
the stress itself before you can be eﬀective in dealing with the stressor.
1. You notice yourself doing the same, apparently pointless thing over and
over again, or engaging in self-destructive behaviors. When your brain gets
stuck, it may start stuttering or repeating itself, like a broken record, or like a
breathless eight-year-old trying to get her mother’s attention by saying “Guess
what? Guess what? Guess what?” You might notice yourself checking things,
picking at things, thinking obsessive thoughts, or ﬁddling with your own body
in a routinized kind of way. These are signs that the stress has overwhelmed
your brain’s ability to cope rationally with the stressor.
2. “Chandeliering.” This is Brené Brown’s term for the sudden,
overwhelming burst of pain so intense you can no longer contain it, and you
jump as high as the chandelier. It’s out of proportion to what’s happening in
the here and now, but it’s not out of proportion to the suﬀering you’re holding
inside. And it has to go somewhere. So it erupts. That eruption is a sign
you’re past your threshold and need to deal with the stress before you can
deal with the stressor.
3. You turn into a bunny hiding under a hedge. Imagine a rabbit being
chased by a fox, and she runs under a bush to hide. How long does she stay
there?
Until the fox is gone, right?
When your brain is stuck in the middle of the cycle, it may lose the ability
to recognize that the fox has gone, so you just stay under that bush—that is,
you come home from work and watch cat videos while eating ice cream
directly from the container, using potato chips for a spoon, or stay in bed all
weekend, hiding from your life. If you’re hiding from your life, you’re past
your threshold. You aren’t dealing with either the stress or the stressor. Deal
with the stress so you can be well enough to deal with the stressor.
4. Your body feels out of whack. Maybe you’re sick all the time: you have
chronic pain, injuries that just won’t heal, or infections that keep coming

[PDF page 36]

back. Because stress is not “just stress,” but a biological event that really
happens inside your body, it can cause biological problems that really happen
inside your body but can’t always be explained with obvious diagnoses.
Chronic illness and injury can be caused or exacerbated by chronic activation
of the stress response.
Amelia told Julie the story of how the science of completing the
cycle saved her life (twice).
“It was when I was in grad school. I was trying to do something
that mattered a lot to me, while simultaneously battling this totally
dysfunctional administration—”
“Oh my God, that’s so familiar,” Julie said.
“—and the stress built up inside me in layers that got denser
and denser until they ﬁnally crushed me. Halfway through the
program, I was hospitalized with abdominal pain and a white
blood cell count that was through the roof. They couldn’t ﬁnd a
cause; they sent me home and told me to ‘relax.’ ”
“Whatever that means,” Julie said.
“I didn’t know either! I just knew I had to do something. So I
started noticing all the external stressors that activated my stress
and recognizing how little control over them I had, so I could start
letting go of those things. I feel sure it helped save my life. But it
wasn’t enough. A year later, I was back in the hospital and they
took out my appendix—the pressing layers of stress inside me had
ﬁnally destroyed an organ.”
“Stress can do that?”
“Heck yes,” Amelia said. “So my sister visited me in the hospital.
She brought me a book about inﬂammation.”
“Your sister gave you a book while you were in the hospital?”
“And a balloon that sang ‘Don’t Worry Be Happy,’ which also
helped,” Amelia said. “But this book explained how health
conditions like repeated infections, chronic pain, and asthma—all
of which I had—are exacerbated or even caused by stress. By
unprocessed emotion. I got home and read this book, and I just

[PDF page 37]

started crying, even though I was thinking, That’s nonsense. It
sounded like hippy-dippy bullshit. But, dude, I was in so much
pain all the time, and it was getting worse as I got older. So I
called Emily sobbing, like, ‘This book says emotions exist in the
body. Is that true?’ ”
“Okay, wow,” Julie said. “Even I knew that.”
“That’s what I’m saying. If I can learn to deal with the stress
itself, learn to complete the cycle, you can, too. Anyone can.
“Anyway, I asked Emily what I was supposed to do with all this
emotion and pain and crap in my body, and she drove an hour
and a half to my house, to bring me a book of relaxation
meditations.”
“Because of course Emily would give you a book,” Julie said.
“Exactly. So I started using these meditations on the treadmill
and elliptical machine, paying attention to physical sensations and
recognizing for the ﬁrst time that certain stray thoughts
corresponded with speciﬁc bodily discomforts. It was wild. It was
mind-blowing. And it worked. I’m healthier—and saner and
happier—than I was in my twenties, because I realized my
emotions and my thoughts and my body are all connected to one
another. Now I’m the one who nags her to exercise and cry and
write ﬁction when she needs to.”
“Because those are the ways she completes the cycle,” Julie
observed. “Okay.” She twisted her wineglass between her ﬁngers,
thinking.
Julie made a plan. She started the school year with two new
strategies: She would begin sifting controllable stressors from
uncontrollable stressors, and she would practice completing the
cycle. She set aside half an hour a day, six days a week, for
exercise or pure play with her daughter, Diana.
It helped…but a few months later she hit a serious obstacle.
And that’s the subject of the next chapter.

[PDF page 38]

The good news is that stress is not the problem. The problem is that the
strategies that deal with stressors have almost no relationship to the strategies
that deal with the physiological reactions our bodies have to those stressors.
To be “well” is not to live in a state of perpetual safety and calm, but to move
ﬂuidly from a state of adversity, risk, adventure, or excitement, back to safety
and calm, and out again. Stress is not bad for you; being stuck is bad for you.
Wellness happens when your body is a place of safety for you, even when
your body is not necessarily in a safe place. You can be well, even during the
times when you don’t feel good.
—
Here’s the ultimate moral of the story:
Wellness is not a state of being, but a state of action.
Our job in this chapter has been to teach you how to deal with the stress so
that you can be well enough to face another day of stressors.
But of course, that still leaves you with a life full of goals, obstacles, unmet
obligations, not-yet-fulﬁlled hopes, and other sources of stress, both big and
small, both enjoyable and painful.
So let’s talk about those goals, and the brain mechanism that keeps track of
them.
tl;dr:
•Just because you’ve dealt with a stressor, that doesn’t mean
you’ve dealt with the stress itself. And you have to deal with
the stress—“complete the cycle”—or it will slowly kill you.
•Physical activity is the single most eﬃcient strategy for
completing the cycle—even if it’s just jumping up and
down or a good old cry.

[PDF page 39]

•Aﬀection—a six-second kiss, a twenty-second hug, six
minutes of snuggling after sex, helpless laughter—are social
strategies that complete the cycle, along with creative self-
expression—writing, drawing, singing, whatever gives you a
safe place to move through the emotional cycle of stress.
•“Wellness”is the freedom to move ﬂuidly through the cycles
of being human. Wellness is thus not a state of being; it is a
state of action.

[PDF page 40]

2
#PERSIST
Sophie, the non-exerciser, is an engineer, but she’s also a black
woman, so she rarely gets to be just an engineer. She has to be an
engineer and a social justice educator, teaching the oblivious white
guys who surround her about the experience of being a woman of
color in science and technology—not because she wants to; all she
ever wanted to do is science. But since she is so often the only
person of color and the only woman in the room, they all look to
her to explain, ya know, why she’s the only person of color or
woman in the room.
One day as we were sitting around a table at an end-of-
semester breakfast with her and a bunch of other women, Sophie
told us a story about the ways she was being taken for granted on
a “diversity” committee she’d been assigned to.
“Is it…racism?” Emily said hesitantly, a white lady afraid to
hurt anyone’s feelings. “Is it because you’re a woman?”
“It’s just the usual nonsense,” Sophie said. “I’m used to all that.”
Amelia, not hesitant, said, “What is wrong with them? Isn’t it
obvious that putting people of color in charge of helping white
people learn how not to be racist is just more white supremacy?
White people are the ones with the problem; we should be doing
the work, not putting more labor demands on black and brown
people.”
Sophie grinned at her omelet and said, “Actually…I’ve been
thinking, if they’re going to ask me to do all this, I can turn it into

[PDF page 41]

a way to get paid. Codify a package of talks and workshops. Take
the Sophie Show on the road. I get requests all the time.”
“Can we talk about the science of how smart that idea is?”
Emily said, excited and impressed. “There’s so much research
about how to turn our frustrations into assets.”
“Can we talk about the science?” Sophie echoed. “Let’s always
talk about the science!”
This chapter is that science.
—
Chapter 1 was about dealing with the stress itself. Chapter 2 is about
managing the stressors. It’s about knowing how to persist when you’re past
the edge of your capabilities, and it’s about knowing when to quit.
Speciﬁcally, it’s about what we call “the Monitor,” the brain mechanism that
manages the gap between where we are and where we are going. Exactly what
this looks like is diﬀerent for everyone, but it impacts every domain of life,
from parenthood to career success to friendships to body image. And for
women, the gap quickly becomes a chasm.
In this chapter, we’ll explain how the Monitor works, and why it sometimes
breaks down. Then we’ll talk about how to implement evidence-based
strategies for every frustration and every failure, from traﬃc jams to tenure.
Allow U s to Introduce… the M onitor
Technically, it’s called the “discrepancy-reducing/-increasing feedback loop”
and “criterion velocity,” but people fall asleep immediately when we say that,
so we just call it the Monitor. It is the brain mechanism that decides whether
to keep trying…or to give up.
The Monitor knows (1) what your goal is; (2) how much eﬀort you’re
investing in that goal; and (3) how much progress you’re making. It keeps a
running tally of your eﬀort-to-progress ratio, and it has a strong opinion about
what that ratio should be. There are so many ways a plan can go wrong, some

[PDF page 42]

of which you can control and some of which you can’t, all of which will
frustrate your Monitor.1
For example, imagine you’re working toward a simple goal: driving to the
mall. And you know it usually takes about, say, twenty minutes. If you’re
getting all green lights and you’re zipping right along, that feels nice, right?
You’re making progress more quickly and easily than your Monitor expects,
and that feels great. Less eﬀort, more progress: satisﬁed Monitor.
But suppose you get stuck at a traﬃc light because someone isn’t paying
attention. You feel a little annoyed and frustrated, and maybe you try to get
around that jerk before the next light. But once you’ve hit one red light, you
end up stuck at every traﬃc light, and with each stop, your frustration burns a
little hotter. It’s already been twenty minutes, and you’re only halfway to the
mall. “Annoyed and frustrated” escalates to “pissed oﬀ.” Then you get on the
highway, and there’s an accident! While ambulances and police come and go,
you sit there, parked on the highway for forty minutes, fuming and boiling
and swearing never to go to the mall ever again. High investment, little
progress: ragey Monitor.
But then! If you sit there long enough, an enormous emotional shift
happens inside you. Your Monitor switches its assessment of your goal from
“attainable” to “unattainable,” and it pushes you oﬀ an emotional cliﬀ, into a
pit of despair. Lost in helplessness, your brain abandons hope and you sit in
your car sobbing, because all you want to do now is go home, and there’s
nothing you can do but sit there and wait.
In an almost painfully funny video posted in January 2017, the satirical
news website The Onion reported that “an increasing number of women are
leaving the workplace to pursue lying facedown on the ﬂoor full-time. A
Department of Labor report says lying motionless in utter resignation on
nights and weekends is just no longer enough for most women.” That’s the pit
of despair: resignation and helplessness.
The tremendous power of understanding the Monitor is that once we’re
aware of how it works, we can inﬂuence our own brain’s functioning, with
strategies for dealing with both the controllable and the uncontrollable
stressors.

[PDF page 43]

D ealing with Stressors You Can Control: Planful Problem-Solving
The Monitor keeps track of your eﬀort and your progress. When a lot of
eﬀort fails to produce a satisfying amount of progress, we can change the
kind of eﬀort we’re investing. For example, the frustration of being stuck in
traﬃc can be minimized with a GPS giving you a new route to go around the
traﬃc. All you need to do is make sure you’ve got the GPS handy. This
strategy is called planful problem-solving.
If you carry a purse laden with the complete contents of a drugstore, you
already know about planful problem-solving. If you write lists, keep
calendars, or follow a budget, you know what planful problem-solving entails.
It does what it says on the label: you analyze the problem, you make a plan
based on your analysis, and then you execute the plan. The good news is that
women are socialized to planfully solve problems. The bad news is that every
problem calls for a speciﬁc kind of planning.
For example, if we’re talking about, say, managing cancer treatment while
working full-time and raising your kids and being a partner to someone, there
are a lot of calendars involved, and information about medication side eﬀects
and how they’re managed, and strategies for making sure everyone gets fed
and does their homework and gets where they need to go each day. Or if
you’re trying to ﬁnd a job, there’s the routine of looking for postings, sending
résumés, attending networking events, prepping for interviews, and so on.
There are pragmatic steps to manage the controllable factors, and controlling
what you can control makes the rest of it more bearable.
The least intuitive part of planful problem-solving is managing the stress
caused by the problems and the solving. As we learned in chapter 1, what
works to manage your stressor will rarely help you manage the stress, so
remember to build completing the cycle into your plan.
Which brings us to the eﬀective way to deal with uncontrollable stressors.

[PDF page 44]

D ealing with Stressors You Can’t Control: Positive Reappraisal
So imagine that you’re stuck in traﬃc and your GPS is busted. For this
situation, the strategy we turn to is “positive reappraisal.”2
Positive reappraisal involves recognizing that sitting in traﬃc is worth it. It
means deciding that the eﬀort, the discomfort, the frustration, the
unanticipated obstacles, and even the repeated failure have value—not just
because they are steps toward a worthwhile goal, but because you reframe
diﬃculties as opportunities for growth and learning.3
Some people naturally notice what’s valuable in diﬃcult situations. These
natural optimists expect good things to happen and automatically believe that
bad things, if they happen, are temporary, isolated events that will have no
lasting impact. If that’s you, congratulations! Optimism is associated with all
kinds of positive outcomes related to mental health, physical health, and
relationships.4 You probably don’t need any more persuasion or instruction on
positive reappraisal. You just keep on keeping on—see the silver lining of
every cloud and the rainbows of every storm. Do you.
Pessimists, by contrast, don’t always expect good outcomes and may view
bad things, if they happen, as symptomatic of larger-scale problems that
could have lasting impact. Amelia is the most pessimistic person we know—
we’ve measured it objectively, with survey instruments used to assess
pessimism and optimism—and, moreover, she’s a conductor whose
professional training teaches her that she can and should be responsible for
everything. So she did not buy this “positive reappraisal” thing. It sounded to
her like a video a friend of ours shared on Facebook titled “Eight Things
Happy People Do Diﬀerently.” It included such helpful if idiomatically
capitalized gems as “EXPRESS GRATITUDE—never let the things you
WANT make you forget about the things you HAVE” and “CULTIVATE
OPTIMISM. Stay positive. When it rains, look for Rainbows. When it’s dark,
look for Stars.”
That is not what “positive reappraisal” means; it’s not as simple as “look on
the bright side” or “ﬁnd the silver lining” or “enjoy the journey.” Nor is it
about not feeling frustrated by the persistent gap between what is and what
could or should be. Nor does it mean sticking your ﬁngers in your ears and

[PDF page 45]

going, “La la la, nothing is wrong, everything is ﬁne!” With positive
reappraisal, you can acknowledge when things are diﬃcult, and you recognize
that the diﬃculty is worth it—it is, in fact, an opportunity.
So Emily presented a couple of decades’ worth of peer-reviewed science to
Amelia, who had no problem with the ﬁrst two steps: ﬁrst, acknowledge when
things are diﬃcult; then, acknowledge that the diﬃculty is worth it. Pessimists
assume everything is hard and will require work, so that’s easy. The hard part
is acknowledging that those diﬃculties are actually opportunities.
But positive reappraisal works because it’s genuinely true that diﬃculties
are opportunities! When something feels uncomfortable, you’re probably
doing something that creates more and better progress than if it were easy.
Just a handful of examples: Students whose assigned reading is typed in an
ugly, diﬃcult-to-read font remember more of what they read in the short term
and score higher on exams in the longer term than those whose materials are
more legible.5 A noticeable, annoying buzz of background noise can increase
a person’s creativity.6 Groups that are more heterogeneous generate more
innovation and better solutions to problems, even though those groups feel
less conﬁdent about their solution and ﬁnd the process more diﬃcult.7 And,
most straightforwardly, people who challenge their bodies with regular
exercise develop stronger bones, muscles, and cardiovascular systems—
strength is the body’s response to doing something eﬀortful.
In fact, there is a distinct downside to eﬀort that is too eﬀortless: When a
task feels easy, we feel more conﬁdent about our ability to perform that task
even though we are actually more likely to fail. Novices who are thoroughly
incompetent rate themselves as very conﬁdent in their ability to do a thing
they’ve just learned to do. By contrast, genuine experts know how diﬃcult
their work is, so they are realistic about their competence and thus rate their
conﬁdence in their own abilities as moderate, even as their performance is, of
course, expert-level.
The reduced stress of positive reappraisal is not an illusion. Struggle can
increase creativity and learning, strengthen your capacity to cope with greater
diﬃculties in the future, and empower you to continue working toward goals
that matter to you. Reappraisal even changes our brain functioning: The
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex activates, which damps the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex, which damps the amygdala, which reduces the stress

[PDF page 46]

response.8 Not every kind of stressor is explicitly beneﬁcial, of course.
Knowing you’re being compared with other people, for example, is quite
likely to reduce creativity.9 But often, the uncomfortable or frustrating
process is more successful. As the researchers put it, you can “convert
aﬀective pains into cognitive gains.”10
Change the Expectancy: Redeﬁne W inning
Planful problem-solving and positive reappraisal are evidence-based ways to
change the eﬀort you invest as you move toward a goal. They’ll reduce your
frustration by keeping you motivated and moving forward. But suppose you
do all that, and it works…except…it’s much more diﬃcult or much…
slower…than…
you…
expected.
Even as you’re succeeding, you grow frustrated because your progress is
not meeting your Monitor’s expectation about how eﬀortful the task should
be. In this case, you need to change your Monitor’s expectancies about how
diﬃcult it will be or how long it will take.
Expectancies are the plan. “Twenty minutes to the mall” is an expectancy.
“Four years to ﬁnish my degree” is another. So is “married with a kid by the
time I’m thirty.” When you’re frustrated by the slow or interrupted progress
toward your goal, and planful problem-solving and positive reappraisal don’t
help with the frustration, you need to redeﬁne winning. Here’s how:
Say your goal is to climb Mount Everest. If you start marching up the
mountain expecting that you’re going to zip smoothly to the peak, as soon as
it gets diﬃcult your Monitor will start to freak out. You might give up. You
might start to wonder if there’s something wrong with you—after all,
somebody told you it was supposed to be easy, and it turns out it’s hard, so it’s
not the mountain that’s the problem, it’s you!
But if you begin the climb knowing ahead of time that it’s going to be the
most diﬃcult thing you’ve ever done, then when it begins to get diﬃcult, your

[PDF page 47]

Monitor will recognize that without getting frustrated. It’s just a diﬃcult goal,
so it’s normal that you’re struggling.
If you’re trying to do something where you will inevitably fail and be
rejected repeatedly before you achieve your goal—like, if you’re recording
music or you’re an actor or you sell insurance or you’re trying to raise a
teenager to be a reasonable adult—then you will need a nonstandard
relationship with winning, focusing on incremental goals.
Amelia tested this strategy one summer, at a choral recording session.
If you were to imagine a recording session, you might visualize a group of
musicians jamming together for hours, or maybe a singer in gigantic
headphones, singing her heart out into a microphone, and the musicians leave
hours later, ﬁlled with the joy of artistic expression.
Maybe that’s what it’s like sometimes. But most of the time, a musical
recording session is more like being stuck in heavy traﬃc on your way home
from work. It’s stop-and-go, when all you want to do is get home.
In a recording session, the goal is perfection, and humans are not perfect,
so it’s six measures (maybe ﬁfteen seconds of music) over and over, with a
guy behind a window saying, “Great singing, choir; let’s do one more,” in
between.
After twenty minutes of singing the same six measures of music over and
over…you start to get bored. After forty minutes, the music no longer has
feeling. And then the guy behind the window says, “Lovely singing, choir. It
sounds a little dry. Can we make the color more speciﬁc this take?” And you
want to rip your hair out, because no, we can’t make the color more speciﬁc,
because all the neurotransmitters associated with emotional (and therefore
timbral) speciﬁcity were burned up ﬁfteen minutes ago when measure two
was out of tune. So, no.
But you have to. It’s a recording session, and the goal is perfection—every
take, every snippet, every moment. Six to eight hours of artistic and vocal
perfection is the goal.
“So we have two choices,” Amelia said to a choir of forty professional
singers. “We can stuﬀ the frustration down deep where it will cause us to
explode at someone else at a later date or otherwise adversely aﬀect our art
and our health…or we can redeﬁne winning.

[PDF page 48]

“The goal, with each take,” Amelia proposed, “is to ﬁll Andrew with joy.”
Andrew was their guy behind the window, the recording engineer—and
not just any recording engineer. Andrew was the Grammy-winning recording
engineer who had worked with some of the most prestigious performers of
the twenty-ﬁrst century. It didn’t hurt that he was also a cutie patootie—
blond, British, bashful. Everyone in the choir was pretty giddy to be working
with him.
Forty singers smiled at the possibility of ﬁlling Andrew with joy, and the
energy in the room shifted.
“It’s better already, isn’t it?” Amelia observed.
It was.
On the third day of trying to ﬁll Andrew with joy, when it was getting
pretty tough to stay focused but they still had another track to lay down, a
soprano asked Andrew, “Andrew, are you ﬁlled with joy?”
Andrew paused in moving a microphone cable, considered for a moment,
and nodded. He said, “Yeah. I really am.”
Redeﬁning winning made the recording session far less agonizing. But
better still, a year later, when the group met again, several singers approached
Amelia privately to tell her, “That Monitor thing? That’s changed, like, my
whole life.”
You’ll ﬁnd a worksheet at the end of the chapter to help you brainstorm
incremental goals that will keep your Monitor satisﬁed, but the super-short
guidelines are: soon, certain, positive, concrete, speciﬁc, and personal.11 Soon:
Your goal should be achievable without requiring patience. Certain: Your goal
should be within your control. Positive: It should be something that feels
good, not just something that avoids suﬀering. Concrete: Measurable. You can
ask Andrew, “Are you ﬁlled with joy?” and he can say yes or no. Speciﬁc: Not
general, like “ﬁll people with joy,” but speciﬁc: Fill Andrew with joy.
Personal: Tailor your goal. If you don’t care about Andrew’s state of mind,
forget Andrew. Who is your Andrew? Maybe you’re your own Andrew.
Redeﬁning winning in terms of incremental goals is not the same as giving
yourself rewards for making progress—such rewards are counterintuitively
ineﬀective and may even be detrimental.12 When you redeﬁne winning, you
set goals that are achievements in themselves—and success is its own reward.

[PDF page 49]

Change the Expectancy: Redeﬁne Failing
For goals that are abstract, impossible, or otherwise intangible, you can
reduce frustration by establishing a nonstandard relationship with winning.
But sometimes you’re aiming for a clearly deﬁned, concrete goal that can’t be
redeﬁned. For these, you will need a nonstandard relationship with failing.
You may do all the things you’re supposed to do, without getting where
you’re trying to go, only to end up somewhere else pretty amazing. Or, as
Douglas Adams’s character Dirk Gently puts it, “I rarely end up where I was
intending to go, but often I end up somewhere that I needed to be.” Widen
your focus to see the inadvertent beneﬁts you stumble across along the way.
This sort of reframing makes failing almost (almost) impossible, since it
acknowledges that there’s more to success than winning.
And we don’t just mean the “We played our best!” spirit of your six-year-
old’s soccer team. There are endless examples of people not achieving their
speciﬁc goal but achieving something important, something world-changing,
along their path to failure. Post-it notes were invented when a chemist tried
and failed to make a strong glue; it turned out his very weak glue had a very
popular use. The pacemaker was invented when Wilson Greatbatch was
trying to create an instrument to measure heart rate, and he built his
prototype wrong. Hillary Clinton’s failure to win the White House set the
stage for record-breaking numbers of women to enter and win political
contests and other leadership positions in the United States. Post-its and
pacemakers and a tidal wave of women entering American politics were
world-changing outcomes of someone’s failure to accomplish something else.
It’s the most demanding form of positive reappraisal, and none of this takes
away the pain of failure and loss. Part of recovering from a loss is turning
toward your grief with kindness and compassion, as well as completing the
cycle of stress brought on by failure. But another part is recognizing failing’s
unintended positive outcomes.

[PDF page 50]

HOW  NOT TO M ANAG E YOU R MO NITOR
Planful problem-solving and positive reappraisal are the
adaptive coping strategies, meaning they generally work and
they carry minimal risk of unwanted consequences. There are
other coping strategies that don’t necessarily help, and some
strategies that are actively destructive. These maladaptive
strategies include things like self-defeating confrontation,
suppressing your stress, and avoidance. W e often turn to such
strategies when we feel out of control in a stressful situation
and are desperately trying to regain control.
An example of self-defeating confrontation is, “I stood my
ground and fought!” Standing our ground is important in
principle and can be eﬀective when we’re not overwhelmed,
but not when we’re stressed and out of control. W hen you’re
still ghting even while you’re overwhelmed, it’s less a valiant
struggle and more that you have your back to the wall and are
surrounded on all sides. Ask for help instead.
Suppressing is, “I didn’t let it get to me.” If something
matters, it should get to you! It should activate a stress
response cycle. Denying that you experience the stress
prevents you from dealing with the stress—and we know from
chapter 1 what happens if you do that. If you notice yourself
acting as though you’re ne when you’re deeply distressed,
again: ask for help.
Avoidance has a couple diﬀerent avors. There’s “I waited
for a miracle to happen,” which abdicates personal
responsibility for creating change, and there’s “I ate until I
couldn’t feel my feelings,” which numbs you out. These can
both be useful stop-gap measures when the stress, worry,
frustration, rage, or despair are overwhelming. Sometimes we
need to numb out with Netix and a pint of Häggen-Dazs.
Once, Emily was teaching about “completing the cycle” and the
importance of actually feeling your feelings and one person

[PDF page 51]

asked, “Is this true if you’re, like, caring for a terminally ill
parent? Is it bad to just shut everything out sometimes and
spend all day watching Pride and Prejudice?”
Heck no. Sometimes you need to close the door on the
world and allow yourself to feel comfortable and safe—as long
as it’s not the only thing you’re doing. Think of it as a short-
term survival strategy. You also need a plan and a sense of
what value there is in the struggle.
Perhaps the most reliably maladaptive response to distress is
“rumination.” Like a cow chewing its cud, we regurgitate our
suﬀering over and over, gnawing on it to extract every last bit
of pain. If you nd your thoughts and feelings go back again and
again to your suﬀering, ask for help.
“This is why people quit self-care,” Julie said to Amelia, opening a
bakery box to reveal a gooey chocolate cake. She cut a big slice.
“When you paint the dingiest wall in a room, it just makes the
other walls look dingier. You said, ‘Process your stress, which is
separate from processing the stressor.’ Well, I did that, and it
helped, and now I’m thinking about getting a divorce, and it’s
basically because of you. Dig in!” She oﬀered a slab of cake on a
plate.
“What the huh?” Amelia said, accepting the slab.
“The huh” was that Julie had spent a month learning to
recognize the stressors in her life, and then completing her stress
response cycles. That was all it took for her to notice that one of
her chronic stressors was her husband, Jeremy.
“I started noticing how much work I was putting into managing
his feelings,” she said, “how much additional stress I had because
of his stress. Then last week it was Diana’s fall recital, and I told
Jeremy, ‘It’s time to go,’ and he groaned, ‘All those kids and that
terrible music,’ and I tried to make him feel better, you know? It’s
not like this is my ﬁrst choice for spending three hours of my life,

[PDF page 52]

but this is what we do. So I said, ‘This is a special moment. We get
to see our daughter on stage,’ trying to help him see the bright side.
And you know what he said? He said, ‘You can make me go but
you can’t make me like it.’ Make him go! Make him like it!
Recitals are parenting! Why am I having to ‘make’ him parent?!
And why am I having to make him feel better? Nobody makes me
feel better, I have to do that myself! I have to ﬁnd things to enjoy
about things that are not enjoyable. I have to ﬁnd a way not to
complain about things I don’t like or want in my life. So that night,
we got into a ﬁght about it, and he said, ‘Well, if you don’t want to
do it, don’t do it. Don’t try to make me feel good. Don’t try to look
on the bright side. Complain if you want to!’
“So that’s what I did. Usually, my ﬁrst instinct is to just do
something myself because he never does it—the dishes, the
laundry, wiping the kitchen counters—and instead I complained.
And you’ll never guess what happened. A week later, he said,
‘What’s wrong with you? All you do is complain and criticize!
You’re so negative!’ I’m so negative! Can you believe that? I said,
‘You told me to complain when I wanted to complain. You said
don’t try to manage your feelings. And if I’m not managing your
feelings then I’m telling you that just running the dishwasher does
not count as cleaning the kitchen.’
“And then he says—brace yourself for this—he says, ‘You
know, if you want something done your way, you have to do it
yourself.’ ”
“Hence considering divorce,” Amelia said.
“Except sometimes it’s great. It’s amazing,” Julie said. She
stopped for more cake, washing it down with dark beer, then she
went on, “You know how slot machines are designed to hook you?
Like, most of the time, you’re just shoving good money after bad,
but every now and then it pays out just enough to make you feel
like you should keep going? That’s my marriage,” Julie said. “So I
quit. I don’t know what I quit, I don’t know for how long, but I
quit. I quit everything but chocolate cake.”

[PDF page 53]

It’s normal for change to be diﬃcult. Sometimes it gets worse
before it gets better. Sometimes a solution to one problem creates
another. Sometimes there’s not enough organization and positive
attitude in the world to save a marriage. Sometimes—as Julie
would eventually ﬁnd—what it takes to save a marriage is saving
yourself.
W hen to G ive U p
The Monitor has a pivot point, where it switches its assessment of your goal
from “attainable” to “unattainable.” You may ﬁnd yourself oscillating
between pushing onward and giving up, between frustrated rage—“This goal
is attainable, and screw these jerks in my way!”—and helpless despair—“I
can’t do it, I give up, everything is terrible!”
It’s easier to manage emotions eﬀectively when we can name them.13 We
couldn’t ﬁnd a name for this emotion, even though every person we know has
experienced it. So we gave it a name:
“Foop.”
You can call it whatever feels right for you, but we like this silly word. We
experience it at diﬃcult jobs, as in “I hate this place, I hate these people, I’m
going to quit! But no, I’m trapped here, I need the money, I have to wait until
I have a new job lined up, I’m never getting out of this hole!” You’re stuck in
Foop Town. It happens in school, as in “I’m going to ﬁnish this semester and
nothing and no one can stop me, no matter how much crap they throw at me!
Ugh, I can’t do it, I give up, I’m a failure!” Foop-o-rama. It happens in
diﬃcult relationships, as in “I’m sure I can save this relationship, I just need
to try harder! But no, it’s hopeless, they’ll never change, I’m not good enough
at feelings to help them be a better person, but ugh, it’s not my job to change
them! But ugh, I should change me.” Ü ber-foop.
So how do you know when it’s time to stop the planful problem-solving,
drop the positive reappraisal, and just…quit?
Science has an answer for when to walk away—sort of. It’s framed in terms
of an “explore/exploit problem,” as in “Should I explore new terrain, or

[PDF page 54]

should I exploit the terrain I’m in?” Animals in the wild are good at it.
Imagine a little bird or a squirrel searching for seeds and nuts in a patch of
forest. At a certain point, she’ll spend more and more time searching, with
less and less success, as she discovers and hoards most of the available food
in that patch. Her Monitor is well tuned to the environment and automatically
triggers a decision to move on to the next patch. It’s not a rational, cognitive
decision; her instincts are connected to the world, reading the environment,
and they signal her to move on, taking into account the cost of the change,
including traveling to a new patch, risk of predation, and so on.14
If you want to try using this principle rationally, all you have to do is write
four lists:
What are the beneﬁts of continuing?
What are the beneﬁts of stopping?
What are the costs of continuing?
What are the costs of stopping?
And then you look at those four lists and make a decision based on your
estimates of maximizing beneﬁt and minimizing cost. Remember to consider
both the long-term and the short-term costs and beneﬁts. And if you decide
to continue, remember to include completing the cycle in your plan.

[PDF page 55]

D ECISION G RID
Should I stay or quit:                                                                                 (e.g., my job, my relationship,
my diet, my place of worship, my substance use, my habit of overcommitting…)

[PDF page 56]

—

[PDF page 57]

But a lot of the time, knowing when to give up comes to us not from rational,
explicit cost-beneﬁt analysis; it comes to us the same way it comes to the bird
and the squirrel—in a quiet intuition that is outside rationality. We simply
hear the voice inside us saying, “You’ve done all you can here. It’s time to
move on.”
Humans—especially women—have an extraordinary capacity to ignore
this voice. We live in a culture that values “self-control,” “grit,” and
persistence. Many of us are taught to see a shift in goals as “weakness” and
“failure,” where another culture would see courage, strength, and openness to
new possibilities. We have been taught that letting go of a goal is the same as
failing. We share stories of people overcoming the odds to achieve
remarkable things in the face of great resistance, which is inspiring. But these
stories too often imply that we are the controllers of our destinies—as if we
control the amount of nuts and seeds in a particular patch of forest. If we
“fail” to achieve a goal, it’s because there is something wrong with us. We
didn’t ﬁght hard enough. We didn’t “believe.”
Our tendency to cling to the broken thing we have rather than let it go and
reach for something new isn’t just a result of social learning. The stress (fear,
anxiety, etc.) underlying the belief changes our decision-making, so that the
more stressed we feel about change, the less likely we are to do it. Say a
squirrel hears a noise in the leaves somewhere close by, so she stops for a
moment, listens…hears nothing else. But she’s vigilant now. Her stress
response is activated. And she stays foraging in her current patch, because
there’s more risk in trying a new patch, what with that potential hidden
predator rustling the leaves. It doesn’t matter how many more nuts and seeds
are in the next patch if there’s also a hawk there that will eat her.
And the resource abundance of the environment you’re in changes how you
decide to quit or stay. In a resource-rich environment, people actually quit
and move on to the next opportunity sooner, because the risk of the move is
lower. It’s easier to change jobs when you’ve got four oﬀers. It’s easier to
leave a bad relationship when you can go straight to a loving relationship with
someone else.
For so many reasons, quitting is hard, and we can’t tell you what the right
decision is. But knowing the factors that shape our reluctance to give up, we
can say this: If you’re feeling not just frustrated and challenged, but helpless,

[PDF page 58]

isolated, and trapped, like you want to hide in a cave, or like you’d rather put
your hand in a toilet full of tadpoles than spend one more day doing the thing,
you should deﬁnitely quit whatever it is.
#ShePersisted
Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren made news when, as she was
attempting to speak in the Senate, she was silenced by Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell. Senator Warren’s goal, when McConnell stopped
her, was to read a letter from Coretta Scott King about the racist judicial
record of then-Senator Jeﬀ Sessions. McConnell said, in what would become
a notorious comment, “She was warned. She was given an explanation.
Nevertheless, she persisted.”
Senators Tom Udall, Sherrod Brown, Bernie Sanders, and Jeﬀ Merkley
subsequently read parts of that same letter, without reprimand.15
Hmmm, what’s diﬀerent about Senator Warren, compared to Senators
Udall, Brown, Sanders, and Merkley? Like Udall and Brown, she’s the senior
senator from her state; like Sanders, she’s a New Englander. Is she the only
one with a law degree? No, Udall is a lawyer, too; that can’t be it.
It’s a head scratcher.
Whatever McConnell’s motivation, women heard his words and recognized
the ways they, too, had been silenced. “Nevertheless, she persisted” instantly
became a rallying cry for women everywhere who had been told to sit down
and shut up. The quote began a storm of social media and blog posts
associating #shepersisted with Malala Yousafzai, Rosa Parks, Sonia
Sotomayor, Tammy Duckworth, Laverne Cox, and many other women who
had faced adversity of all kinds and ultimately thrived.16
It resonated so powerfully because persisting is what women do, each and
every day. Often we persist because we literally have no choice. We have
children to feed and a world to change, and we can’t stop just because it’s
hard. Overcoming obstacles like the Mitch McConnells of the world isn’t just
a necessary step on the way to our goals; overcoming those obstacles is part
of our success! Yay!

[PDF page 59]

But raise your hand if it gets exhausting. Raise your hand if you’ve wanted
to quit. Raise your hand if you’ve asked yourself, How much more do I have
to do before I’ve done enough? How much of myself do I have to give? How
smoothly do I have to polish myself before I can move through the world
without friction?
Us too.
Women’s diﬃculty is rarely lack of persistence—on the contrary. We stand
gazing at the possibilities of what the world can be—what we can be. Our
world can be fair; our communities can be safe; our homes can be tidy; our
children can put their shoes on when it’s time for school! But there is a deep,
wide chasm between us and the realization of those possibilities. Our default
action in the face of that chasm is to do whatever it takes to get to the other
side, and keep on doing it, no matter what, until we get there.
But then we get exhausted and we wonder if we can accomplish any of the
things we hope for, without destroying ourselves in the process. We ask
ourselves if it’s time to quit.
Life is rarely perfect. Nearly always, there is a gap between how things are
and how we wish, hope, expect, or plan for them to be. The quality of our
lives is not measured by the amount of time we spend in a state of perfection.
On the contrary, people of vision—think of the principal social justice
leaders of the twentieth and twenty-ﬁrst centuries—see the largest gap
between what is and what ought to be, and they know they will not live to see
a world that fully achieves their vision of what’s possible. A gap between
reality and perfection is not abnormal or a sign of dysfunction; it’s a normal
part of life. In fact, as we’ve seen, the Monitor thrives when things are a little
frustrating, when there’s always some fresh challenge, some new skill to
develop, some unknown territory to chart. The quality of our lives, day to
day, is measured by our freedom to choose to stay or leave. That freedom
comes when we have abundance enough and safety enough to let go of what
is broken and reach for something new.17
Sophie’s strategy of monetizing her expertise is planful problem-
solving and positive reappraisal at its most pragmatic. Is the world
insisting you be good at something you never chose to be good at?
Turn it into a business opportunity that solves the problem!

[PDF page 60]

People of color, women, people with disabilities, and members
of other disenfranchised groups have persisted in the face of
impossible frustrations, often crediting their most diﬃcult trials
with their most empowering personal growth.
What keeps us striving when we know that we, ourselves, won’t
see the changes we’re ﬁghting for? Why do we persist when we
hope only to make life better for the next generation?
The answer to those questions is “meaning beyond ourselves.”
That science is the subject of the next chapter.
A goal is not a life—but it may be what gives shape and direction to the
way we live each day. If our goals are what we want to accomplish,
“meaning” is why we want to accomplish them. We continue to do our best
raising a child, even when that child makes us consider running away to join
the circus. We persist at a frustrating job because we know we’re making a
diﬀerence in people’s lives. We pursue our art, even when we know we may
never make a living at it, because we simply would not be fully ourselves if
we stopped. Though your goals may diﬀer from ours, they share a common,
overarching theme: they give us a sense of engagement with something larger
than ourselves.
tl;dr:
•Frustration happens when our progress toward a goal feels
more eﬀortful than we expect it to be.
•You can manage frustration by using planful problem-solving
for stressors you can control, and positive reappraisal for
stressors you can’t control.
•When we’re struggling, we may reach a point of oscillating
between frustrated rage and helpless despair. Solution:
Choose the right time to give up, which might be now or
might be never; either way, the choice puts you back in the
driver’s seat.

[PDF page 61]

•Your brain has a built-in mechanism to assess when it’s time
to quit. Listen to its quiet voice. Or do a worksheet;
sometimes that’s easier.

[PDF page 62]

REDEFINE W INNING
To cope with the frustration of trying to achieve a goal that’s all but
impossible—e.g., “perfection”—or else eternally in-progress—e.g.,
“successfully” parenting a child—start by redeﬁning what it means to “win” at
this goal.
Frustrating Goal
 
 
What is it about this goal that frustrates your Monitor? Is it unattainable? Do
you feel ambivalent about it? Was it someone else’s dumb idea? Is there part
of it that makes you feel helpless? Are there too many frustrating yet
unavoidable obstacles between you and “winning”?
 
Brainstorm at least twenty options for deﬁnitions of “winning” that will
satisfy your Monitor. Make sure you have plenty of silly, impractical ideas, as
well as a few that could actually work. Brainstorming works best when you
don’t ﬁlter! For some people, it also works better when you collaborate; if
that’s you, ask a friend to help.
 

[PDF page 63]

Now choose your three favorites and score them based on the criteria for
Monitor-pleasing goals:
Soon: When will you know you’ve succeeded? Your goal should be
achievable without requiring patience.
Certain: How conﬁdent are you that you can succeed? Your goal should be
within your control.
Positive: What improvement will you experience when you win? It should be
something that feels good, not just something that avoids suﬀering.
Concrete: Measurable. How will you know you’ve succeeded? There is an
external indication that you have succeeded.
Speciﬁc: As opposed to general. You should be able to visualize precisely
what success will look like.
Personal: Why does this goal matter to you? How much does it matter?
Tailor your goal so that it matters to you.
Reread your description of what made this goal frustrating. Now you can
select whichever new deﬁnition of “winning” best addresses those problems!

[PDF page 64]

3
M EANING
Some time after Julie’s chocolate cake meltdown, she invited
Amelia over, because, she said, she had some venting to do.
But instead of talking, Julie was binge-watching British
children’s television. It was hypnotically soothing. She stared
numbly at the screen, then as the credits rolled and the music
played, she said, “Jeremy’s been sleeping on the couch for a week.
I have no idea what might happen next.” Amelia’s jaw dropped,
but Julie quickly added, “I don’t want to talk about it.”
They watched another fourteen-minute episode in silence. The
credits ran. The TV went dark and silent and a message appeared
on the screen, asking Julie if she was still watching.
“Don’t judge me!” she yelled at the TV, and she clicked yes.
A third hypnotically soothing episode, and then Julie said, “I
had food poisoning once. Bad. Like, sitting on the toilet with a
trash can on my lap bad, you know?”
Wincing a little, Amelia said, “And this feels like that?”
Julie shook her head. “It’s so much worse. Because with food
poisoning you know why it’s happening. You can accept it,
because you know why.”
That’s the power of meaning. We can tolerate any suﬀering, if
we know why.
And not knowing why is, itself, a profound type of suﬀering.
“I wrote a list,” Julie said, handing Amelia a piece of paper
covered in writing.

[PDF page 65]

It was a list of questions, including, Is this worth it? Do I want
it to be worth it? Should it be worth it? How can I respect
myself, if I give up? How can I respect myself, if I can’t let go?
What kind of person am I? What is love? What matters?
“Let’s watch another episode.” She clicked the remote control at
the TV and the colorful, singsong critters moved around the
screen.
“I’d like to know the answer to some of these questions,” Amelia
interrupted. She looked at the paper and read, “What matters?”
How to answer that question is the subject of this chapter.
—
Every Disney heroine has an “I Want” song, in which they explain what’s
missing in their lives. Moana feels called by the ocean. Tiana is “Almost
There,” saving money to start her own restaurant. Belle wants “adventure in
the great wide somewhere.” The tradition goes all the way back to Snow
White, singing “Someday My Prince Will Come.” You can chart the progress
of women in America by the things Disney heroines sing about in their “I
Want” songs.
Though what they sing about changes, there is one constant: a heroine feels
called by something.
Now, just as most of us do not spontaneously burst into song (though some
of us do—Amelia), most of us don’t lead lives of epic heroism and high-
stakes adventure. We aren’t chosen by the ocean to ﬁnd the demigod Maui,
restore the heart of Te Fiti, and save the world—nor, frankly, would most of
us want to, given the choice. We’ve got other things on our plates. We have
jobs and school. We have kids to feed, a bathtub to scrub, and an inbox to
clear, not to mention novels to read and movies to watch.
But like all heroines, we thrive when we are answering the call of
something larger than ourselves, when all the commuting and laundry and
picking up dog poop and repeating “No television until you ﬁnish your
homework!” has a meaning larger than the grind of daily routine.

[PDF page 66]

Over the last thirty years, science has established that “meaning in life” is
good for us, the way leafy green vegetables and exercise and sleep are good
for us.
This chapter is about “meaning” as a power you carry inside you that helps
you resist and recover from burnout. A woman’s need for “meaning in life” is
not fundamentally diﬀerent from a man’s, but the obstacles that stand
between women and their sense of meaning are diﬀerent.
W hat Is It, Exactly?
Art, orgasms, and meaning in life: you probably recognize them when you
encounter them, they’re diﬀerent from everything else, and no two people’s
experiences of them are exactly the same.1
Researchers approach “meaning” in two diﬀerent ways. Positive
psychology, as spearheaded by Martin Seligman, includes “Meaning” as one
of the main elements that promote happiness in people who are otherwise
healthy.2 Other research approaches meaning as a coping strategy for people
who are recovering from illness or trauma.3 These diﬀerent views of
“meaning” have four things in common:
First, both approaches agree that meaning isn’t always “fun.”4 In the
happiness-enhancing approach, “meaningful” activities are described as ones
“seeking to use and develop the best in oneself,” in contrast to those devoted
solely to “seeking pleasure.”5 In the trauma-healing model, “meaning”
includes learning to “live with” chronic illness. In the ﬁrst case, it’s like
getting your nutrients from vegetables; in the second, it’s like getting nutrients
through a painful but eﬀective injection. Most of us would prefer the veggies,
but sometimes the injection is our only choice.
Second, both approaches agree that meaning oﬀers a “positive ﬁnal value
that an individual’s life can exhibit.”6 That is, a life has meaning when a
person contributes something positive to the world by the time they die—
whether they enjoyed it or not. Meaning is the feeling that you “matter in
some larger sense. Lives may be experienced as meaningful when they are

[PDF page 67]

felt to have signiﬁcance beyond the trivial or momentary, to have purpose, or
to have a coherence that transcends chaos.”7
Third, meaning is not constant. Some moments in our lives feel intensely
meaningful. Others feel “meaning-neutral”—you’re just running errands or
doing chores and it doesn’t matter whether you feel a connection with
something larger than yourself. Still others include a strong sense of its
absence, moments when we are seeking meaning. We might go too long
without experiencing a sense of meaning and we begin to wonder what life
even means, or maybe terrible things happen that seem to strip life of all
meaning and we ask why. Meaning comes and goes.
And ﬁnally, whether it supports thriving or sustains coping, meaning is
good for you.8 People with greater senses of meaning and purpose in life
experience better health and are more likely to access preventative healthcare
services, to protect that health.9 A meta-analysis of the relationship between
“purpose in life” and health found that greater sense of purpose was
associated with a 17 percent lower risk of all-cause mortality.10 And these
beneﬁts can be gained through active intervention. People who participate in
meaning-centered psychotherapy develop greater overall well-being,
relationships, and hope, as well as reduced psychological stress and improved
physical health.11 Even among people living with advanced or end-of-life
disease, interventions that enhanced meaning in life had beneﬁts for
participants’ depression, anxiety, distress, and overall quality of life.12
“Meaning,” in short, is the nourishing experience of feeling like we’re
connected to something larger than ourselves. It helps us thrive when things
are going well, and it helps us cope when things go wrong in our lives.
So, where does it come from?
You M ake It
You may be used to hearing about meaning as something we “search for” or
“discover,” and sometimes people experience it that way—as a sudden
revelation that descends on them from on high, or a treasure that they ﬁnd
after years of following the map. But rarely is meaning something that we

[PDF page 68]

ﬁnd at the end of a long, hard journey. For most of us, meaning is what
sustains us on the long, hard journey, no matter what we ﬁnd at the end.
Meaning is not found; it is made.13
To make meaning, the research tells us, engage with something larger than
yourself.14
This “Something Larger”—like a God you believe in or a dream you have
for the future—is your source of meaning. Its mere existence is not enough,
any more than the mere existence of green vegetables is enough for you to be
nourished by them. You have to engage with it actively. Eat your greens.
Engage with your Something Larger. Like vegetables, your Something Larger
may not be the most fun thing on your plate, but it’s probably the most
nourishing. Unlike vegetables, you may have a sense of calling to engage with
this Something Larger, the way heroines are called by adventure, by starting
their own restaurants, or by the ocean.
Research has found that meaning is most likely to come from three kinds
of sources:15
1. pursuit and achievement of ambitious goals that leave a legacy
—as in “ﬁnding a cure for HIV” or “making the world a better
place for these kids”;
2. service to the divine or other spiritual calling—as in “attaining
spiritual liberation and union with Akal” or “glorifying God with
my words, thoughts, and deeds”; and
3. loving, emotionally intimate connection with others—as in
“raising my kids so they know they’re loved, no matter what” or
“loving and supporting my partner with authenticity and
kindness.”
Many sources of meaning are a combination of all three, and if your
Something Larger falls outside these three categories, that’s cool, too. In
terms of your personal well-being, there is no right or wrong source of
meaning; there’s just whatever gives you the feeling that your life has a
positive impact.16

[PDF page 69]

W hat’s Your Something Larger?
Some people know exactly what their Something Larger is, and others take
years to ﬁgure it out. Amelia has always known, even when she didn’t know
she knew. She has wanted to be a choral conductor since she was twelve, and
here she is, with three degrees in leading choral ensembles and an impressive
résumé of conducting gigs. Emily stumbled from school to work to school
again until, looking back to trace the pattern of the doors she had walked
through, she ﬁnally ﬁgured it out, about twenty years after Amelia. Emily’s
Something Larger: teaching women to live with conﬁdence and joy inside
their bodies. Amelia’s: art. There are plenty of other ways we could
contribute—there is no end of need in the world—but these make us feel that
we are contributing something positive to the world. Which is how we make
meaning.
Our experiences discovering the sources of meaning in our lives might
suggest there is no predictable way for each individual to ﬁnd it for
themselves. But the common thread is an inner voice that you can hear if you
stop and listen. Everyone has it.
Hear that? The steady rhythm in the center of your chest?
Or maybe it’s a slower pulse lower down, somewhere in the swell of your
belly. Or a halo of wisdom crowning your skull. Stop for a minute—literally
stop reading, maybe even set a timer—and listen. Ask yourself, What am I
doing when I feel most powerfully that I’m doing what I’m meant to be doing?
Dolores Hart was a movie star with a gift for listening to that voice with
what she calls “the ear of the heart.” In 1964, she had starred in several major
motion pictures, played a leading lady to Elvis Presley, and was starring in a
Broadway play when she visited the Abbey of Regina Laudis in Bethlehem,
Connecticut, for a rest. At the age of twenty-four, she was a rising star with
everything the world valued most: beauty, professional success and prestige,
money, and a handsome ﬁancé. But she had been feeling like something was
wrong, something was missing.
As soon as she set foot on the abbey grounds, she felt like she had come
home. Not long after, she took her vows and committed her life to God’s
service. She describes it:

[PDF page 70]

In a sense, I never really felt like a person until I came to Regina
Laudis. Staying was not a compromise, but, in fact, the real
challenge of my life….I had not chosen to escape my
responsibilities by secluding myself from reality. I believed that if
there is to be an ultimate and real salvation for the whole of
mankind, it must begin by a very personal involvement.17
She didn’t enter the abbey because Catholicism oﬀered a set of answers she
preferred. Even as an inmate of a Roman Catholic monastic community, she
says, “I am not easily persuaded by religious answers….I have found my
answers step by step.”
If you’re still struggling to recognize your Something Larger, research has
found a few strategies that can help:
Try writing your own obituary or a “life summary” through the eyes of a
grandchild or a student.
Ask your closest friends to describe the “real you,” the characteristics of
your personality and your life that are at the core of your best self.
Imagine that someone you care about is going through a dark moment in
their life—they’ve experienced signiﬁcant loss and feel helpless and isolated
(the two things that drain us of meaning fastest). As your best self, write that
person a letter to support them through this diﬃcult time. Then reread it. It’s
for you.18
Finally, think of a time when you experienced an intense sense of meaning
or purpose or “alignment” or whatever it feels like for you. What were you
doing? What was it that created that sense of meaning?
All these approaches can help you distinguish your inner voice’s genuine
sense of Something Larger from the thing that gets in the way—namely,
Human Giver Syndrome.
Human G iver Syndrome
In the introduction, we described philosopher Kate Manne’s language of
“human givers” versus “human beings,” a cultural code in which human

[PDF page 71]

beings have a moral obligation to be their whole humanity, while human
givers have a moral obligation to give their whole humanity, and give it
cheerfully. We call the behavior patterns associated with these moral
convictions “Human Giver Syndrome.”
Think of Human Giver Syndrome as a virus whose only goal is to
perpetuate its own existence. You were infected with it as soon as you were
born, inhaling it with your very ﬁrst breath. And, just as the rabies virus
makes dogs aggressive and bovine spongiform encephalopathy makes cows
“mad,” Human Giver Syndrome changes human behavior in order to
perpetuate itself—even if it kills the host (that’s us) in the process.
Do you suﬀer from Human Giver Syndrome? Symptoms include
•believing you have a moral obligation—that is, you owe it to
your partner, your family, the world, or even to yourself—to
be pretty, happy, calm, generous, and attentive to the needs of
others;
•believing that any failure to be pretty, happy, calm, generous,
and attentive makes you a failure as a person;
•believing that your “failure” means you deserve punishment
—even going so far as to beat yourself up; and
•believing these are not symptoms, but normal and true ideas.
That last one is the crux, of course. What makes this metaphorical “virus”
so successful as an infectious agent is that its symptoms are self-masking. It
blinds you to its presence and is self-perpetuating—that is, we are surrounded
by people who are also “infected,” and they, too, treat themselves and us and
everyone as if Human Giver Syndrome were just normal human behavior,
which reinforces our own sense that it is not a disease at all, but a healthy,
normal way to live.
If you were raised in a culture shaped by Human Giver Syndrome, you
were taught to prioritize being pretty, happy, calm, generous, and attentive to
the needs of others, above anything else. Maybe—maybe—you can pursue
your own personal (read: selﬁsh) Something Larger, if you’ve thoroughly met

[PDF page 72]

the needs of everyone else and don’t stop being pretty and calm while you do
it.
On the surface, Human Giver Syndrome seems to support some Something
Largers, like being of service. Service is what givers are supposed to do
anyway, and it is a deﬁning characteristic of the great ﬁgures of history.
Audre Lorde: “When I dare to be powerful, to use my strength in the
service of my vision, then it becomes less and less important whether I am
afraid.”19
Malala Yousafzai: “I raise up my voice—not so I can shout, but so that
those without a voice can be heard.”
Shirley Chisholm: “Service to others is the rent you pay for your room here
on earth.”
Hillary Clinton: “Do all the good you can, for all the people you can, in all
the ways you can, for as long as you can.”20
But each one of these women worked to be “of service” in ways that
violated their roles as human givers. And if you do that—say, by leaving
someone else’s needs unmet, or not being pretty and calm while you do it, or
claiming power that “rightfully” belongs not to a human giver but to a human
being—the world smacks you down.
They say, “What’s the matter with you?”
They say, “Get back in line.”
This is a theme we’ll encounter over and over through the rest of this book:
Behave yourself. Follow the rules. Or else.
Human Giver Syndrome goes so far as to insist we’re wrong to see
ourselves as heroines battling an enemy. A giver has no needs and thus has
nothing to ﬁght for. Joseph Campbell himself, father of the “Hero’s Journey”
framework, summarized it succinctly when presented with a “Heroine’s
Journey” to consider. He said, “Women don’t need to make the journey. In
the whole mythological journey, the woman is there. All she has to do is
realize she’s the place people are trying to get to.”21
Women are a “place”; only men are “people” on a journey, with a villain to
defeat. Women’s Something Larger is men.

[PDF page 73]

Tell that to Malala; lots of people did. Tell it to U.S. Representative
Tammy Duckworth, who lost her legs in combat during the Iraq War and
then became the ﬁrst Asian American woman and the ﬁrst disabled woman
elected to the U.S. Congress. Tell it to Tona Brown, the ﬁrst out transwoman
of color to play Carnegie Hall. Tell it to Ellen Ochoa, the ﬁrst Latina to go to
space and now the director of the Johnson Space Center. Tell it to every
woman who ever worked a soul-eroding factory job or cleaned other people’s
houses eighty hours a week or danced at a strip club, all to pay the bills, to
keep the heat on, so her kids wouldn’t be cold at night—or to get an
education, to become a leader in her discipline.
Tell her, “What’s wrong with you? Get back in line. You don’t need to go
anywhere; you just need to be the place a man is trying to get to.”
We say it all the time, to other women and to ourselves. To suﬀer from
Human Giver Syndrome is to be convinced, on some level, that everyone
should suﬀer along with us. And so if we see someone who looks like they’re
not even trying, we feel outraged. When we see women who aren’t trying to
control their appearance or their emotions so that they aren’t making anyone
uncomfortable, or who use their time, money, and labor to improve their own
well-being rather than someone else’s, “What’s the matter with her?” we say
to ourselves. “If I have to follow the rules, so does she! She needs to get back
in line.” And we call that unruly woman fat or bossy or full of herself. As if
those are bad things.
In a sense, Human Giver Syndrome is the ﬁrst villain in our story. It tries
to make you ignore your Something Larger, because you’re supposed to
dedicate all your resources to Human Beings. But how can we escape or
defeat the villain in our own story when we’re busy policing others to keep
them from defeating it?
The good news is, when you engage with your Something Larger and thus
make meaning in your life, you’re actually healing Human Giver Syndrome,
both in yourself and in the people around you.

[PDF page 74]

M ake M eaning, Heal Human G iver Syndrome
Human Giver Syndrome used to tell women that their place—their only place
—was in the home (and in some places, it still does). Betty Friedan
documented how giving was weaponized to manipulate housewives of the
1950s and ’60s, forcing them away from the workplace they had inhabited
during the Second World War by insisting that homemaking was the (only)
Something Larger that would fulﬁll them as women. And if, as Betty Freidan
so memorably put it, they didn’t “have an orgasm waxing the kitchen ﬂoor,”22
it wasn’t anyone’s fault but their own. If homemaking left them unfulﬁlled or
dissatisﬁed, then they were broken as women. Until Freidan named this
“problem that has no name,” millions of women had been suﬀering in silence.
The second-wave feminist movement created a new force that allowed
women to push for something diﬀerent or just more and not be asked,
“What’s the matter with you?” It opened up new possibilities for women. It
motivated personal life changes and political action and a cultural shift that,
in turn, changed the culture itself.
There was backlash—there always is. Human Giver Syndome punishes
those who try to treat it, and many paid a price for their resistance or
rebellion. But the long-term result was an incrementally fairer world.
Human Giver Syndrome will try to stop you from pursuing meaning. Your
job is to not stop. Keep engaging with your Something Larger. Use planful
problem-solving. Keep completing the cycle. #Persist.
But of course, sometimes it’s not that easy.
Sophie engages with her Something Larger—SCIENCE FOR ALL!
—in many diﬀerent ways. Her work, of course, is one way. Her
mentoring of young women in STEM is another. Her consulting
and speaking about making STEM more welcoming for women of
color is still another. She works extremely hard, many hours a
day, in environments that are often pretty toxic, and she makes a
real diﬀerence in the world. Hundreds of people could tell you
how she has changed their lives for the better.

[PDF page 75]

Sophie’s Star Trek fandom is her most playful source of
meaning. When she was a little girl, Sophie saw Lieutenant Uhura
on TV and knew that she could be a black girl and a scientist and
an explorer and be taken seriously. And because she saw that it
was possible, she believed nothing could stand between her and
that goal.
And what is she now? An engineer.
Sophie’s a hardcore fan. She even has an Uhura costume—not
a Zoe Saldana Uhura costume, or even a 1979 Star Trek: The
Motion Picture beige jumpsuit, but a season three minidress, as
worn by Nichelle Nichols, scoop collar, bracelet sleeves, and all,
in engineering red. She wears it to Star Trek conventions, where
she connects with fellow fans who dwell with her in an optimistic
future where anyone can be an engineer, an explorer. For her,
cosplay is practice living inside a world where that future already
exists.
And in a way, it does already exist—in her. From the pointed
toes of her mid-calf boots to the top of her bouﬀant wig, Sophie is
six feet ﬁve inches of everything Star Trek aspired to—and of the
vision Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., shared when he convinced
Nichelle Nichols to stay in the role of Lieutenant Uhura.23 As
Nichols tells the story, “For the ﬁrst time, we are being seen by the
world over as we should be seen. [King] says, ‘Do you understand
that this is the only show that my wife Coretta and I will allow our
little children to stay up and watch?’ ”
Making the world a better place for all scientists is not just
patient explanations of what privilege is and stories of “accidental”
exclusion of women and people of color. It can also be a bright
red minidress and winged eyeliner. When Sophie climbs out of her
car at a Trekker convention and hands her keys to the valet, every
human turns to look and admire. Everyone wants to take pictures
with her.
And when they ﬁnd out she is an actual, real-life engineer,
many times their brains turn inside out.

[PDF page 76]

Uhura’s ﬁrst name is Nyota, the Swahili word for “star.”
As in, what we reach for.
M aking M eaning W hen Terrible Things Happen
When life is stable, we don’t need much sense of meaning to stay well. We
engage regularly with our Something Larger, and our brains metabolize those
experiences to keep us feeling like the world makes sense and our existence
has purpose. Hooray!
But.
Sometimes life gets rocky.
When an airplane bounces into a sudden pocket of turbulence, you grab
the arms of your seat, as if by holding your seat, you can hold the plane
steady. You, of course, know it doesn’t work that way, but your hands don’t.
They will hold on to anything they can reach, and the very fact of holding on
makes the turbulence more tolerable.
When our lives bounce through pockets of turbulence—such as the
uncertainty of joblessness or a confrontation with death or a sense that our
work is not making a diﬀerence or that we don’t belong—our brains grab
hold of our Something Larger, as if it can stop our lives or the world from
tumbling out of the sky. And it works.24 It helps us tolerate the uncertainty,
the mortality, the helplessness or loneliness, until we ﬁnd ourselves on the
other side of the turbulence and back in smooth airspace.
But sometimes the turbulence lasts too long, or the plane actually crashes.
You survive, but you’re left in an “existential vacuum,” devoid of meaning.25
Terrible things happen, leaving us feeling trapped and convinced that nothing
we do can make a diﬀerence. In such times of crisis, we have to repair the
plane before we can return to our journey. That requires us to turn inward
toward diﬃcult feelings with kindness and compassion.
Those Disney princess “I Want” stories each have a point where our
heroine is in crisis and has to stop and take time to turn inward. Moana has to
repair her boat. Snow White needs a long nap and a kiss from her true love.
Tiana is forced to stop pursuing her dream when she is turned into a frog;

[PDF page 77]

solving the frog problem by “digging a little deeper” not only allows her to get
closer to her dream, but also makes her a princess. With compassion for the
wounded parts of our hearts, minds, bodies, and communities, our recovery
from adversity can include an increased sense of meaning in life, moving us
from coping to thriving.
Example: A study of more than three thousand U.S. veterans who had all
experienced trauma found that those experiencing post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) symptoms were more likely than those without PTSD to
experience post-traumatic growth. This included both a better sense of
personal strength (“I discovered that I’m stronger than I thought I was” and “I
know better that I can handle diﬃculties”) and appreciation of life (“I have a
greater appreciation for the value of my own life”).26
How do they do it? How can people continue to engage with their
Something Larger even in the face of terrible things? Even in the face of
terrible things that separate them from their Something Larger?
The key is: You can never be separated from your Something Larger,
because it is inside you.
ORIG IN STORY
W ant to turn something terrible into an unlooked-for
opportunity to engage with your Something Larger and make
meaning? Rewrite the narrative of your experience, focusing on
the lessons and strengths you gained through adversity.27 W e
call this your “origin story,” like the origin of Batman’s life as a
superhero in the tragic death of his parents or the origin of
W onder W oman on the sheltered shores of Themyscira.
Take half an hour or so to write your story, answering these
questions:
1.W hat parts of the adversity were uncontrollable by you?
(e.g., other people and their choices, cultural norms, your life

[PDF page 78]

circumstances at the time, your age and prior experience, the
weather…)
2.W hat did you do to survive the adversity, in the moment?
(Hint: W e know for sure that you did successfully survive the
adversity, because here you are.)
3.W hat resources did you leverage, to continue surviving
after the adversity had passed? Be speciﬁc. (M ay include
practical resources, like money or information; social
resources like friends, your ability to seek, ﬁnd, and accept
help, or your social inﬂuence; or emotional resources like
persistence, self-soothing, and optimism.)
Once you have your story, take a moment to write about a
time when those resources empowered you to overcome a
subsequent diﬃculty.
Then write a summary:
Even though I couldn’t control                     (adversity), I managed
to                     (survival tactic), and then I used                     (resource) to
grow stronger. After that, I could                     (skill/win/insight).
W riting an origin story can even help you identify your
Something Larger, because it helps you notice the parts of your
past experience that you leveraged to survive.28 M eaning is not
made by the terrible thing you experienced; it is made by the
ways you survive.
This process might hurt. That’s actually another part of what
makes this practice eﬀective: It allows your body to practice
feeling the feelings of past wounds, to learn that those feelings
are not dangerous, and to complete the incomplete stress
response cycles activated all those years ago.29 It starts with
your willingness to look, to risk the discomfort of paying
attention to what you thought was only negative, and to learn
to see it with nonjudgment, curiosity, and even compassion.

[PDF page 79]

Your Something Larger Is W ithin You
Moana’s Something Larger is the ocean; she feels it calling her. As she tells
Maui, the ocean chose her for her mission. Almost no one agrees with her.
Her family wants her to stay home and be chief of her island. Maui is
skeptical that the ocean would choose “a curly-haired non-princess” who can’t
sail. Then some terrible things happen and Moana drops into the pit of
despair. She even tells the ocean to “choose someone else.”
But the ghost of her grandmother, the “village crazy lady” who always
believed in her, appears and nudges Moana to remember who she is. As
Moana considers what has brought her to this pivotal moment, she realizes (in
song form): “The call isn’t out there at all / It’s inside me!”
The call was never coming from “out there”; it was coming from inside her
own heart. She was the “chosen one” not because something outside her
chose her and called across a distance, but because something in her own
heart was calling, and so, without even knowing it, she chose herself.
“Moana” is the Maori word for “ocean”; Disney made the lesson nice and
literal.
Whatever calls you, whether it’s the ocean or art or family or democracy,
isn’t out there. It’s inside you. Like all the cycles and rhythms we describe in
this book, it comes and goes, accelerates and decelerates, falls away and rises
again. Like a tide, inside you. But no matter what forces oppose you, whether
it’s Human Giver Syndrome or natural disasters or personal loss, nothing can
stand between you and your Something Larger.
Your Something Larger lives inside you. Maybe everyone around you
disagrees. Maybe your family wants you to stay home—or leave home.
Maybe even your mentors are skeptical, and only the village crazy lady agrees
with you. Still, you hear it over the noise of Human Giver Syndrome and
through the suﬀering of violence and injustice. You know; you hear the call in
your heart.
Julie breathed deeply and stared in the direction of the TV,
pondering the question of what matters to her. “My daughter
deﬁnitely matters,” she said, ﬂuids dripping from most of the

[PDF page 80]

oriﬁces in her face. “Diana. Teaching is so important, you know, it
really matters, but even if I lost that, if I lost everything else, it
would be okay as long as I had Diana.”
And she cried for a long time, until the truth started hurting
less.
And that was enough—that moment, that reminder—to get her
through a little more of the most challenging time of her life.
“I just need a little more help,” she said at last. “We’d been
having this same ﬁght over and over and he wasn’t hearing me
and nothing had changed. I just couldn’t do it anymore. I ran out
of ‘can.’ I lost the ability to can. If I do everything, if I manage his
feelings and the house and everything, then I’m exhausted. And if
I don’t do it, I suﬀer from his shitty mood and nothing gets done.
I’m just tired. When I made him move downstairs, I didn’t even
have the energy to be mad, you know? I was too tired to yell.”
She wasn’t where she needed to be yet, to preserve her own
well-being. It would take a more blatant wake-up call to force her
to turn and ﬁght for larger-scale, longer-term well-being. But
sometimes it’s enough just to get through the day and still feel like
there’s a reason to keep struggling.
—
During World War II, an unknown Jew, hiding from the Nazis, scratched
these words into the wall of a cellar:30
I believe in the sun, even when it is not shining.
I believe in love, even when feeling it not.
I believe in God, even when He is silent.
This is not a poem that explains what the Holocaust might “mean.” How
can genocide ever “mean” anything to its victims and survivors? It’s a poem
about how a person can make it through such horrors. We can’t “believe” our

[PDF page 81]

way out of oppression, exile, or despair. But when we make meaning, we can
sustain ourselves through worse things than we can imagine.
“Meaning in life” is made when you engage with the Something Larger
that’s waiting for you inside your own body, linking you to the world. It
doesn’t take much, but it’s important because our “meaning in life,”
established when we’re doing well, will be a bedrock to support us, whatever
adversity we face. We can hold on, come what may, by listening to the
quietness inside ourselves, that knows the world makes sense.
There is plenty of adversity in the world, and it’s the topic of the next two
chapters. But we want you to confront it knowing you are well armed with
these innate weapons and the skill to use them. You’ve got your stress
response and the knowledge of how to complete the cycle. You’ve got your
Monitor and planful problem-solving and positive reappraisal. You’ve got
your Something Larger. They will protect you from adversity. They will heal
you in the aftermath of adversity.
So this is the point in the story where we step away from the shelter of
internal experience. This is the time when we stand and look into the face of
the enemy.
It’s about to get pretty dark. But you’re ready.
tl;dr:
•“Meaning in life” is good for you. You make meaning by
engaging with something larger than yourself—whether
that’s ambitious goals, service to the divine, or loving
relationships.
•Meaning enhances well-being when you’re doing well, and it
can save your life when you’re struggling.
•Human Giver Syndrome is a collection of personal and
cultural beliefs and behaviors that insist that some people’s
only “meaning in life” comes from being pretty, happy,
calm, generous, and attentive to the needs of others.

[PDF page 82]

•The stress response cycle, the Monitor, and meaning are all
resources you carry with you into the battle against the real
enemy.

[PDF page 83]

PART II
 
The Real Enemy

[PDF page 84]

4
TH E G AM E IS RIG G ED
Sophie was taking her show on the road, being paid—a lot—to
speak at corporate meetings about creating workplaces that
support a diverse workforce. She was running some drafts of her
talk by Emily, for her pedagogical expertise.
“What’s that?” Emily asked, pointing to an unfamiliar word on
a PowerPoint slide.
“Kobayashi Maru,” Sophie said, and when Emily looked blank,
she explained, “It’s a training simulation for Starﬂeet cadets, an
unwinnable scenario designed to test your character. You can’t
win, so the goal is to lose in a way that’s honorable.”
“A Star Trek thing?” Emily asked.
“A Star Trek thing,” Sophie conﬁrmed, “that turns systemic bias
into a game.” She clicked to the next slide. “People hire people they
know, people who went to the same schools.” She pointed to the
statistics graphic, then clicked to the next slide, which was full of
references to Implicit Associations research. “They have an
unconscious bias that makes them prefer people who look like
them.” The next slide was covered in images from movies, TV
shows, videogames, and comic books. “Every piece of media they
consume aﬃrms their biases. And”—she clicked to the next slide,
which was covered in dozens of characters, all white, all men, all
heroes: knights in shining armor, men in capes, mutants with
telepathic abilities, wizards, detectives, wizard detectives—“they

[PDF page 85]

see that spaces ﬁlled with white men are not just normal, but
better.”
Her tone lightened to her more usual geeky excitement. “So here
I am, trying to rescue the ship in the Neutral Zone, and the
Klingons are going to attack. I. Am. Going. To. Die. The win is I
prove my character every time I’m tested.”
“You’re going to tell them outright that they’re creating an
unwinnable scenario?”
Sophie nodded. “The science says it’s good for us to name it.”
That science is the subject of this chapter.
—
In the wake of violence, the ﬁrst priority is to stop the bleeding and save the
victim’s life. But at some point, we need to go back and ﬁgure out how the
bleeding started so we can prevent it from happening again. We need to talk
about the knife and the person who used it against us.
The tools we described in Part I stop the bleeding; they can help you right
now. They can quite literally save your life. Every human can complete the
stress response cycle, manage their Monitor, and engage with their Something
Larger, because those resources exist inside us. You’ll have access to them all
your life, no matter where you go, no matter what culture you live in.
But we need to talk about where the bleeding came from—the knife, and
the enemy who wielded it.
If you’re a woman in the industrialized West, you’ll confront a particular
set of enemies that will try to cut you down to size, over and over, and they’ll
lie to your face while they do it, saying it’s for your own good, saying you
should be grateful for their “help.” And because we’ve been confronting these
enemies literally since before we were born, we often believe them.
To explain, we need to talk about some rat research. We promise it’s worth
it.
Okay: Imagine two rats. Rat #1—let’s call him Ralph the Rat…only
pronounced “Rafe,” like Ralph Fiennes. In fact, let’s say it’s not a rat, it is

[PDF page 86]

actually Ralph Fiennes. He’s in a box—it’s called a “shuttle box”—with a
ﬂoor that periodically electrocutes his feet. It’s not painful, but it is
uncomfortable. Ralph hates being electrocuted and he wants to get out of
there every time it happens. Fortunately for him, after the zapping begins, a
little door opens brieﬂy, and he can make a run for it! He escapes! His
dopamine levels double, as his Monitor quickly learns that escaping the shock
is an attainable goal! He has overcome adversity and learned that he can
make a diﬀerence in his situation.
Rat #2—we’ll call him Colin—and let’s make it Colin Firth, because why
not?—is not in a box; he’s in a tank of water, for the “forced-swim test.”
(You can tell it’s bad just by the name, right?) Colin, like most rats, can swim
—he did it in Pride and Prejudice and A Single Man—but he doesn’t love it;
he’d like to get out of the water as soon as possible. So he swims and swims
and swims and swims…and never reaches dry land. As he keeps failing, he
get frustrated…and then desperate! Foopy! And ultimately Colin’s Monitor
switches its assessment of his goal from “potentially attainable” to
“unattainable.” His dopamine levels drop by half; he feels helpless, and he
just ﬂoats, in a last-ditch eﬀort to reserve energy until there’s any sign of land.
Here’s maybe the saddest part about this: If we take Colin out of the water,
dry him oﬀ, and put him into the shuttle box, he will not even try to escape
the shock, though the door is right there.1 In the shuttle box, Colin could
escape if he tried, but he can’t try. His brain has learned that trying doesn’t
work, that nothing he does makes a diﬀerence…and so he has lost the ability
to try.
This inability to try is called “learned helplessness.” Animals, including
humans, who repeatedly ﬁnd themselves in bad situations from which they
can’t escape may not even try to escape, even when given the opportunity.
When an animal has learned helplessness, it goes straight past frustration
right to the pit of despair. It’s not a rational choice; their central nervous
system has learned that when they are suﬀering, nothing they can do will
make a diﬀerence. They have learned they are helpless. Their only available
route for self-preservation is not to try.
When you read studies like these—and there are hundreds of them—part
of you can’t help wanting to go to the rat and let him in on the secret: “Colin,

[PDF page 87]

this thing is rigged! The experimenters are messing with you on purpose, just
to see how you’ll react.”
That’s what researchers do when they study learned helplessness in
humans. In one example, researchers subjected study participants to an
annoying noise that participants either could or could not turn oﬀ. Many
participants in the “helpless” group shut down as the rats did, and simply
stopped trying to solve the problem. But researchers made sure participants
didn’t walk out of the experiment trapped in the pit of despair. As soon as a
participant in the “helpless” group was “shown that the noise was rigged or
the problem was unsolvable, his symptoms would disappear.”2
Just knowing that the game is rigged can help you feel better right away.
And that’s what this chapter is for.
In the young adult dystopian series The Hunger Games, Katniss Everdeen
is forced into a “game” in which she has to kill other children. It’s a ritual
developed by the totalitarian government to control the provinces.
Before she goes into the game, her mentor says, “Remember who the real
enemy is.”
We are not our own worst enemy. Nor is the enemy the other people in the
game.
The enemy is the game itself, which tries to convince us that it’s not the
enemy.
Let’s get started.
The Patriarchy. (U gh.)
We know. The word “patriarchy” makes many people uncomfortable. If
you’re one of those people, that’s completely ﬁne. You don’t need to accept
the word, or use it, to recognize the symptoms of living in it. Its messages
ring inside us like a song that’s been stuck in our heads so long that we don’t
even notice it anymore, not recognizing that it was taught to us in our infancy.
On the day a baby is born (if not sooner), the adults declare either “It’s a
boy!” or “It’s a girl!” If no diﬀerence existed in the way boys and girls were

[PDF page 88]

treated, a baby’s genitals would be no more important in deciding how the
child was raised than any other part of their body. But instead, the baby is
treated as if all sorts of other things about them are true—what kind of toys
they’ll enjoy, what skills they’ll develop, whom they’ll grow up to fall in love
with, what they’ll want to be when they grow up.
The diﬀerence between how boys and girls are raised is gradually
shrinking; more and more, fathers are in favor of their daughters possessing
“traditionally masculine” traits like “independence” and “strength”…even if
they’re not so enthusiastic about their own wives or girlfriends possessing
those same characteristics. But our expectations are still widely diﬀerent for
girls and boys; you can see how wide the diﬀerence is simply by looking at
the toy aisle for girls and the toy aisle for boys. The diﬀerence isn’t neutral.
Being raised as a boy makes it easier for boys to grow up and take on
positions of power and authority, which is all “patriarchy” means.
This takes a lot of forms:
Explicit misogyny. One example of this is a reality TV star declaring he can
grab women “by the pussy” whenever he wants because he’s famous, and a
ﬂood of media coverage suggesting that this sort of thing is perfectly okay
—“just locker-room talk.” Imagine if he (or a woman) had said he can “grab
men by the dick” whenever he wanted.
Or a young man goes on a murderous rampage, killing several people and
injuring many more, and justiﬁes it by saying women refuse to have sex with
him. In response to one such mass murderer who identiﬁed as an “incel”
(“involuntarily celibate”), The New York Times ran an op-ed that unjokingly
argued that “redistribution of sex”—that is, sex for men, with women—was a
reasonable idea.3 You see, women could be preventing these deaths, if only
they did their job of meeting the sexual needs of dangerous men.
In the time that we were writing this book, there were ﬁfteen public mass
shootings in the United States perpetrated by men or boys, several of whom
were motivated, at least in part, by some form of jealousy, sexual frustration,
or emotional rejection by a woman or girl.4 In more than half of all mass
shootings, the perpetrator kills his intimate partner or family members,
including his mother, his wife or girlfriend, or his children.5

[PDF page 89]

Sex and relationship violence. Sexual assault disproportionately and
systematically targets women: women are three times more likely than men to
be assaulted, while 95 percent of sex oﬀenders are men; one in ﬁve American
women college students experiences sexual assault or attempted sexual
assault during college.6 Globally, men who rape women report that their
primary motivation is the basic belief that they have a right to a woman’s
body, regardless of how she feels about it, a belief termed “sexual
entitlement” in the research.7 Women are held responsible for being assaulted
based on how they “lead men on” with behavior or attire, but perpetrators are
disproportionately under-prosecuted. At the same time, public oﬃcials
accused of sexual assault are allowed to defend themselves by implying that
the woman making the accusation is too ugly to rape.
In addition to the threat of acute physical and sexual violence, women face
chronic gendered stressors every day. These experiences of patriarchy are
like traﬃc noise in a big city. If you live there, you get so used to it you
hardly notice it anymore, but that doesn’t make it less noisy. The noise
includes:
Body image. We talk about this extensively in chapter 5, so we’ll save a
complete discussion for then, but we want to mention now that body
dysmorphia and disordered eating disproportionately and systematically
impact women more than men, and the dynamic is already in place by
elementary school, with half of six-year-old girls worrying they’re “too fat.”
And let’s remember that eating disorders have the highest mortality of any
mental health issue. Body image isn’t about vanity; women’s lives are on the
line.
Getting a word in edgewise. Again, the dynamic is already in place by
elementary school: boys speak up and call out answers eight times more than
girls.8 Among grown-ups, in meetings where men are the majority, women
speak a third less than men; only when there are more women than men do
women speak as much as men.9 During President Barack Obama’s ﬁrst term
in oﬃce, his women staﬀers struggled so much to get their voices heard that
they coordinated an “ampliﬁcation” tactic, where when one of them made a
key point, the others would repeat it, crediting the original speaker. Even
President Obama, a self-declared feminist, needed active intervention to
create gender balance.

[PDF page 90]

In rat research, these kinds of pervasive problems are called “chronic, mild
stress.” Rats may be deprived of food and water for unpredictable—but not
dangerous—periods of time; their cages tilted at a 45-degree angle for a few
hours; water poured on their bedding; strobe lights ﬂashed for hours at a time.
Everything is just a little bit too hard, so that every day, bit by bit, the
survivable helplessness eats away at them.10 In human terms, researchers are
creating for these rats a context of “one damn thing after another.”
In the twenty-ﬁrst-century West, “one damn thing after another” is what
being a woman often feels like. It’s a constant, low-level stream of stressors
that are out of your control. Most individual examples are little more than an
annoyance…but they accumulate.
We’re not saying life isn’t diﬃcult for everyone, or that men and boys don’t
struggle with these issues, too. They do. The pressure to conform to an ever-
shrinking mold is increasing as companies discover how much proﬁt there is
to be made from telling men they aren’t valuable unless they have six-pack
abs or instantaneous erections. People of every gender die in mass murders,
often including the killer, and men are more likely to die by violence,
including at their own hand. Misogyny doesn’t just kill women.
But that’s another book. We’re here to address the fact that we exist in an
environment where women are more likely than men to get back to their nest
to ﬁnd that someone has poured water on their bedding.
Womanhood as a “chronic, low-level stress” is even messier than it sounds,
for two reasons: First, it’s very possible that female and male biologies
respond diﬀerently to that stress. When male rats are exposed to these
chronic, mild stressors, their swim time in the forced swim drops in half
pretty much right away. After six weeks, it drops in half again. Female rats,
by contrast, take three weeks to drop their swim time in half…and it doesn’t
change after six weeks. Female rats exposed to chronic, mild stressors persist
more than males do. They work harder in the face of diﬃculty; it takes twice
as long for their brains to shift into helplessness. Even female rats, it seems,
#persist.
And second, one of the stressors we experience is being told that we’re not
experiencing any more or diﬀerent stress than men. One aspect of the
patriarchy (ugh) in the modern West is that it says it doesn’t exist anymore.

[PDF page 91]

Gaslighting
Remember the movie Gaslight? Ingrid Bergman’s husband ﬂickers the lights
(gaslights, from before electricity) but tells her she’s imagining it. He puts a
watch in her bag and tells her she stole it. He snoops around in the attic
looking for her dead aunt’s jewels, and tells Ingrid she’s imagining the
footsteps she hears. He denies her contact with other people, saying it’s for
her own good because clearly her nerves are shaky.
Isolated and trapped, what can she do but believe him?
In the movie, Ingrid Bergman is ﬁnally vindicated when a policeman,
dreamboat Joseph Cotten, comes to her house and says, “Yes, the gaslights
are ﬂickering. You are not crazy.”
This story resonated so strongly with generations of moviegoers that
“gaslighting” has become a term to describe the larger phenomenon of
women and other marginalized groups being told over and over that it’s their
imagination.
That thing people do, when they tell you you’re imagining the
discrimination? They’re gaslighting you.
And that feeling you have when someone is doing it to you but you’re not
sure because maybe they’re right and you’re overreacting and being too
sensitive? Like you can’t trust your own senses, except what your senses are
telling you is unambiguous? That’s feeling gaslit. You’re ﬁlled with
simultaneous doubt, fear, rage, betrayal, isolation, and panicked confusion.
You can feel that a situation is wrong, but you can’t explain why or how. So
you worry that you misunderstood something, or you feel inadequate for
being unable to articulate your objection.
It’s hard to go to a friend and explain what happened, how you reacted and
why. Without recognizing gaslighting for what it is, you might even hesitate
to share that story at all because gaslighting is designed to make you question
your own credibility and competence. But rest assured. You’re not wrong or
stupid: you’ve been gaslit.
Pundits on TV inform us that sexism isn’t a thing anymore (#notallmen,
and P.S.: neither is racism #alllivesmatter), so if we’re not paid as much as
the men (or the white people) we work with, that’s because we haven’t earned

[PDF page 92]

it—or, worse, because men ask for what they want, and if we would just ask,
we would get it. And if we ask but don’t get it, it’s because we didn’t ask the
right way. Magazines tell us that if we just drink ten green smoothies a day,
we’ll feel great and look great, our kids will say “please” and “thank you,” and
our boss will give us that promotion. And if none of those things happen, it’s
because we failed to drink the ten green smoothies; it’s certainly not because
of systemic bias.
The message is consistent and persistent—whatever is wrong, it’s your
fault. It can’t be true that the whole rest of the world is broken or crazy;
you’re the one who’s broken and crazy. You haven’t tried hard enough. You
haven’t done the right things. You don’t have what it takes.
Eventually, what can we do but believe them?
Gaslighting creates deeply uncomfortable feelings of being trapped, while
making you believe you put yourself in that trap, which just makes you
angrier and sadder and less hopeful.
Some people who gaslight you are doing it on purpose.11 They’re the bully
who grabs your hand and slaps you with it, chanting, “Stop hitting yourself!
Stop hitting yourself!”
But not everyone who gaslights is a jerk. Some of them suﬀer from what
we might call “patriarchy blindness.” We’ve found two causes of this
blindness: Human Giver Syndrome and the “headwinds/tailwinds
asymmetry.”
Patriarchy Blindness #1: H uman Giver Syndrome
At the heart of Human Giver Syndrome lies the deeply buried, unspoken
assumption that women should give everything, every moment of their lives,
every drop of energy, to the care of others. “Self-care” is, indeed, selﬁsh
because it uses personal resources to promote a giver’s well-being, rather than
someone else’s.
Human Giver Syndrome is the framework on which the “second shift”
hangs—the shrinking but ongoing inequality in the time and eﬀort spent on
childcare and housekeeping between men and women—forty hours per week

[PDF page 93]

for women versus an hour and a half for men, globally.12 Even in the most
balanced nations—which include the United States, the United Kingdom, and
Canada—women still spend 50 percent more time in this unpaid labor.13 For
example, the diﬀerence was twenty-six hours per week for women, versus
sixteen hours for men in the United Kingdom, in 2016.14
Worse, Human Giver Syndrome is the framework on which sexual
violence hangs—the basic belief that men have a right to women’s bodies,
and if a woman looks attractive to a man or puts herself in a position where a
man can take control of her body, well, that’s what happens; men have a right
to take what they can get. This isn’t just an emotional and cultural dynamic. It
has been and still is a literal, legally sanctioned reality. For millennia in the
United Kingdom, a woman and everything she possessed became the legal
property of the man who married her. Only recently did a woman gain the
right to keep her own property when she married (1882), to keep her name
(1924), and to not be raped by her husband (1991).15
Human Giver Syndrome is so deeply ingrained, it takes being confronted
with statistics and dates to reveal the imbalances and injustice to us. Without
large-scale, objective measurement and historical perspective, it’s all too easy
to feel comfortable with the familiar inequalities: Human givers don’t own or
control anything, not even their bodies, so when we hear about a woman
being sexually harassed, abused, or assaulted by a man, we lament the ways
an accusation of sexual assault or harassment will hinder the man’s promising
career, and suggest that the woman doing the accusing brought it on herself.
Accusers get death threats, and the accused is put on the Supreme Court.
In short, it’s easy to be blind.
So how do we keep our eyes open, and help others to see?
When we teach college students about human beings and human givers, we
ask, “What’s the solution?”
What do you think?
The ﬁrst answer students give is nearly always, “Raise everyone to be
human beings!”
Let’s think about that for a second. What would a world look like in which
everyone was a human being, competitive, acquisitive, and entitled?

[PDF page 94]

One philosophy major, faced with this image, blurted out, “Solitary, poor,
nasty, brutish, and short,” quoting Thomas Hobbes, who saw the “state of
nature” as a “war of all against all,” because “man, whose joy consisteth in
comparing himself with other men,” is “continually in competition for honour
and dignity.”
If we raise everyone to be “human beings,” the result is eternal war and/or,
if we follow Hobbes, totalitarian government. Fun! And the fact that so many
students automatically assume that the category “human beings”—that is,
men—is the default and “human giver”—that is, women—is the alternative,
is itself a symptom of Human Giver Syndrome. It is “patriarchy blindness.”
Now, what if…just what if…we raised everyone to be a version of a
human giver? What if we assumed it was every person’s moral responsibility
to be generous and attentive to the needs of others? What if we assumed no
one was simply entitled to have what they wanted from another person, but
everyone was supposed to try to help others whenever they could?
No one would sit watching television while the other cooked dinner and
did the dishes, unless both had mutually agreed that what worked best for
both of them was that one should rest while the other gave. No law would
allow anyone to take control of another person’s body, because no one would
expect that right. No one would feel the mess of doubt, betrayal, sadness, and
rage that comes from being gaslit, because no one would gaslight. And when
anyone dropped into the pit of despair, the givers who surround them would
turn toward them with generous compassion, without judgment. The absence
of the patriarchy (ugh) makes being a human giver safer.
Human Giver Syndrome is deeply entrenched and it takes time and
practice to eradicate it. Even after spending decades working in sexual
violence prevention and response, Emily still notices periodic twinges of
Human Giver Syndrome, ﬂeeting thoughts of “Why did she go into his
room?” or “Why didn’t she leave?” The goal is not to eliminate these ideas
entirely; it is to spot them earlier and earlier, because they’re easier to uproot
when they’re small. To recognize when Human Giver Syndrome may be
blinding her to the patriarchy, Emily uses a simple gut check. She asks
herself, “How would I feel about this, if it were a man instead of a woman [or
vice versa]?”

[PDF page 95]

Or, “Am I assuming this woman has a moral obligation to be pretty, happy,
calm, generous, or attentive to the needs of others?” and “Am I assuming this
man has a moral right and obligation to be competitive and acquisitive, to
take and have anything he can, regardless of the impact on others?”
Human Giver Syndrome blinds us to the patriarchy (ugh), because it
constrains our ability to view gender-based inequalities, imbalances, and
injustices as unfair.
But it’s not the only reason a person might be blinded.
Patriarchy Blindness #2: H eadw inds/Tailw inds Asymmetry
In Emily’s long-distance-cycling days, she noticed that a ﬂat part of her ride
was ﬂatter on the way home than on the way out.
“Huh?” you ask. “How could the same road be ﬂatter going south than it
was going north?”
In fact, the “ﬂat” road had a grade of less than 1 percent above horizontal.
It looked ﬂat, but if it were actually ﬂat, it would have felt the same in both
directions, or maybe more diﬃcult on the way home, when her legs were
fatigued from the twenty-plus miles she had just ridden. Yet it felt noticeably
easier on the way home. The strangest part is that, because it looked ﬂat, her
brain and her legs interpreted the sensation of zipping over the southbound
road as what ﬂat was supposed to feel like, and the diﬃculty of the
northbound ride as somehow more diﬃcult than ﬂat was supposed feel.
This sort of bias is called the “headwinds/tailwinds asymmetry,” because
people tend to notice their adversarial headwinds and not their helpful
tailwinds. It shows up in all kinds of people, in all kinds of situations.
Researchers have found that Americans generally believe that the electoral
college and campaign ﬁnance systems give unfair advantage to whichever
political party they disagree with most, regardless of what the evidence says.
People similarly believe their preferred sports team had more disadvantages
going into a game than the other team. People even report that their parents
were easier on their siblings than on themselves—no matter what their
siblings have to say about it.16 In so many ways, most of us tend to ignore or

[PDF page 96]

forget about advantages we’ve received, but remember the obstacles we’ve
overcome, because the struggle against the obstacles requires more eﬀort and
energy than the easy parts.
Falling victim to headwinds/tailwinds asymmetry isn’t the same as being a
jerk. Jerks complain about being treated unfairly when the reality is they’re
being treated fairly instead of being given preferential treatment. But most of
the time, when people insist, for example, that women don’t have it harder
than men, they’re expressing headwinds/tailwinds asymmetry. When National
Public Radio (NPR) covers a new study that shows male doctors are half as
likely to introduce a fellow female doctor as “Dr. So-and-so,”17 the Facebook
comments in response to the story are full of women saying, “How screwed
up is it that we need a study to prove what every woman knows?” and men
saying, “What about teh menz?”18 Those men aren’t necessarily jerks; they’re
just oblivious of their tailwinds.
White people inﬂict their headwinds/tailwinds asymmetry on people of
color all the time; the road looks ﬂat, so how could it be any less ﬂat for
people of color? It must be that the brown person just isn’t as strong a cyclist
or they’re lazy or entitled. It can’t be a problem with the road. White people
are not all jerks, but we are, most of us, victims of the headwinds/tailwinds
asymmetry.
People from aﬄuent families do it to poor people; citizens do it to
immigrants; nondisabled people do it to people with disabilities. People in
any dominant group ﬁnd it impossible to believe that the road isn’t as ﬂat for
others as it is for them; they only know they’re working really hard. But there
is a simple reality check to help counteract this cognitive bias.
Even as Julie was wrestling with marriage diﬃculties, she got a
new job at a high school in the same school district. It was a big
improvement—better administrators, plus more money, ﬂexibility,
and prestige. On top of that, she was in charge of the theater
program, which was a dream come true.
When Amelia emailed to ask how the new job was going, Julie
replied: “I love it, I’m exhausted, it’s amazing, my brain is thrilled,
my stomach hurts. I’m so lucky. CAN YOU BELIEVE THIS: I’m

[PDF page 97]

the ﬁrst woman ever to run the theater program at this school!
WHAT? HOW.”
For the ﬁrst time, Julie was directing a high school theater
production. She had written plays in college and had basic theater
training, but had never been in charge of the whole thing the way
her new job required her to be.
So many decisions had to be made, so much work had to be
done. She found herself drowning in work, unable to ﬁnd time to
do enough, and having less and less patience in rehearsals.
She spoke to the band director, who was in charge of musical
direction of the show. He had noticed that she was taking on more
responsibility than her predecessor.
“Why are you doing all of that?” he asked her. “That is the job
of your stage manager, assistant director, stage crew—you don’t
do any of that.”
“But they asked for my help.”
“Of course. They’re little baby birds taking their ﬁrst steps out of
the nest. Let them take risks.”
She felt herself ﬂinch from the idea that her baby birds might
fall, naturally identifying with the mother hen. “How do I do
that?” she asked.
He shrugged. “You just do it.”
Mmmmmkay.
Julie realized that her “mother henning” was the problem. As a
mother hen, she was putting not just the needs, but also the wishes,
desires, and total comfort of her students ahead of her own work
and sanity.
She wondered if “father cocking” was a thing.
Julie decided to invent it. She began responding to anyone’s
assumption that she would take on their responsibilities for them
by either telling them that they could handle that task themselves
or giving them a name of someone who might be able to help.
After a few weeks of this, she compared notes with the band

[PDF page 98]

director, and he conﬁrmed that her new approach was more like
her predecessor’s.
It was not a universal success. Students complained. Her
administrators asked her why she wasn’t taking charge of the
play.
“I am taking charge,” she said. “I’m doing everything my
predecessor did, everything the director across town does. I’m
asking the students to take initiative.”
“Well, they say they don’t feel that you’re supporting them.”
Why did the students feel diﬀerently about her as a director
than their previous director?
“Human Giver Syndrome,” Amelia suggested. “The expectations
for women are diﬀerent from men, even if no one says it out
loud.”
“So…what do I do?”
“Keep doing your job, being awesome at it, and eventually the
people you work with get used to the fact that you’re a person, an
individual, a director. Their old expectations will be eroded by
your competence.”
Julie tried and it helped. Father cocking was smoothing her
path through the gendered expectations of her job.
But again, it would turn out not to be enough.
The “Tall Tree” Fairness Test
We can imagine the advantages and disadvantages that shape our lives as
similar to the natural environment that shapes a tree as it grows. A tree
growing on an open, level ﬁeld grows straight and tall, toward the sun; a tree
that grows on a hillside will also grow toward the sun—which means it will
grow at an angle. The steeper the hill, the sharper the angle of the tree, so if
we transplant that tree to the level ﬁeld, it’s going to be a totally diﬀerent
shape from a tree native to that ﬁeld. Both are adapted to the environment

[PDF page 99]

where they grew. We can infer the shape of the environment where a tree
grew by looking at the shape of the tree.
White men grow on an open, level ﬁeld. White women grow on far steeper
and rougher terrain because the ﬁeld wasn’t made for them. Women of color
grow not just on a hill, but on a cliﬀside over the ocean, battered by wind and
waves. None of us chooses the landscape in which we’re planted. If you ﬁnd
yourself on an ocean-battered cliﬀ, your only choice is to grow there, or fall
into the ocean. So if we transplant a survivor of the steep hill and cliﬀ to the
level ﬁeld, natives of the ﬁeld may look at that survivor and wonder why she
has so much trouble trusting people, systems, and even her own bodily
sensations. Why is this tree so bent and gnarled?
It’s because that is what it took to survive in the place where she grew. A
tree that’s fought wind and gravity and erosion to grow strong and green on a
steep cliﬀ is going to look strange and out of place when moved to the level
playing ﬁeld. The gnarled, wind-blown tree from an oceanside cliﬀ might not
conform with our ideas of what a tree should look like, but it works well in
the context where it grew. And that tall straight tree wouldn’t stand a chance
if it was transplanted to the cliﬀside.19
One kind of adversity: How many white parents do you know who
explicitly teach their children to keep their hands in sight at all times and
always say “Yes, sir” and “No, ma’am” if they are stopped by the police?
That’s just standard operating procedure for a lot of African American
parents. Black parents in America grow their kids diﬀerently, because the
landscape their kids are growing in requires it. The stark diﬀerence between
how people of color are treated by police and how white people are treated
results in white people thinking black people are ridiculous for being afraid
of the police. We can’t see the ocean, so when black people tell us, “We do
this to avoid falling into the ocean,” we don’t understand. But just because we
can’t see it doesn’t mean it’s not there. How can we tell? By looking at the
shape of the tree. Trees that grow at an angle grew on the side of a hill.
People who are afraid of the police grew up in a world where the police are a
threat.20
Just because the road looks ﬂat doesn’t mean it is. Just because you can’t
see the ocean doesn’t mean it’s not there. You can infer the landscape by
looking at the shapes of the people who grew in those environments. Instead

[PDF page 100]

of wondering why they aren’t thriving on the level playing ﬁeld, imagine how
the ﬁeld can be changed to allow everyone to thrive.
CO M PASSIO N FATIG U E
The patriarchy (ugh) not only aﬀects us directly, but also causes
indirect harm to us as w e care for others. W hen w e experience
stress on behalf of others, w e may dismiss it as inconsequential
or “irrational” and ignore it. G ivers may spend years attending
to the needs of others, w hile dismissing their ow n stress
generated in response to w itnessing those needs. The result is
uncountable incomplete stress response cycles accumulating in
our bodies. This accumulation leads to “compassion fatigue,”
and it’s a primary cause of burnout among givers, including
those w ho w ork in helping professions (many of w hich are
dominated by w omen— teaching, social w ork, healthcare, etc).
Signs of compassion fatigue include21
•checking out, emotionally—faking empathy w hen you know
you’re supposed to feel it, because you can’t feel the real thing
anymore;
•minimizing or dismissing suﬀering that isn’t the most extreme
— “It’s not slavery/genocide/child rape/nuclear w ar, so quit
complaining”;
•feeling helpless, hopeless, or pow erless, w hile also feeling
personally responsible for doing more; and
•staying in a bad situation, w hether a w orkplace or a
relationship, out of a sense of grandiosity— “If I don’t do it, no
one w ill.”
People w ho live through traumatic experiences are called
survivors.

[PDF page 101]

People w ho love and support people w ho live through
traumatic experiences are co-survivors. They need all the
support and care that a survivor needs. If they don’t get it, they
run the risk of burning out, dropping out, and tuning out. If w e
w ant to change the w orld, w e need change agents to know
how  to receive care.
Fortunately the skills you’ll learn in the last section of this
book— social connection, rest, and befriending your inner critic
— are evidence-based strategies for recovering from and
preventing compassion fatigue.22
It would be great if the world could maybe stop telling us how broken and
crazy we are, but we don’t have to wait for the world to change in order to
stop feeling this way. We can start right now. It’s what the rest of this book is
about.
The ﬁrst step is knowing the game is rigged—seeing the way the rules are
set up not just to treat some people unequally, but also to blind us to the
unfairness of the rules.
The next steps are to apply the ﬁrst three chapters of the book: (1)
Complete the cycle, to deal with the stress itself. (2) Use planful problem-
solving and positive reappraisal, to keep your Monitor satisﬁed. And (3)
engage with your Something Larger, which will heal Human Giver
Syndrome.
1. Complete the Cycle: Feels About the Patriarchy
As Gloria Steinem wrote, “The truth will set you free, but ﬁrst it will piss you
oﬀ.” Seeing the rigged game isn’t a neutral experience; you’ll probably feel
some feelings about it as you go through the world spotting the ways the
game is rigged and the ways the world is lying to you about the ways the
game is rigged. These feelings are uncomfortable, and when they get really

[PDF page 102]

intense it’s tempting to ignore them and just stop playing. In other words:
burnout. So let’s not ignore them.
Rage is a big one. A lot of us are carrying around decades of incomplete
stress response cycles because Human Giver Syndrome told us we had to be
happy and calm and not make other people uncomfortable with our anger.
Move, sing, scream, write, chop wood. Purge the rage. Complete the cycle.
Grief is another big one. We mourn for the loss of the life we might have
had, the person we might have been, if we had been born into a world that
believed women are 100 percent people and that men should be attentive to
the needs of others. And it’s complicated, too, because this lying, unfair
world made you who you are, and a lot of who you are is pretty amazing,
right? Not perfect, no one is perfect, but wow. Wow.
What do you do with the grief? You go through the tunnel. You allow it to
move through you. Each time, your best self, the part that makes you go
“Wow!”—even if you don’t yet know who she is—will be with you as you
grieve; she is the light at the end.
And there’s despair. Despair is diﬀerent from grief. It’s the helpless,
hopeless feeling we get when our Monitors give up on a goal, deciding it is
unattainable.
Fortunately, science can help us with despair.
2. U nlearning H elplessness: D o a Thing
In those small, short-term experimental conditions, just telling the helpless
human that the game is rigged was enough to make them feel better. But
when learned helplessness has been induced over a lifetime of experience,
you need to teach your nervous system that it’s not helpless.
How?
You do something—and “something” is anything that isn’t nothing. The
patriarchy (ugh) is designed like the perfect shuttle-box experiment,
frustrating and disappointing us over and over until we give up. But that
research also demonstrated how helplessness can be unlearned.

[PDF page 103]

Here’s how they did it for dogs: After inducing learned helplessness,
experimenters physically dragged the dogs over the barrier to the safe side of
the shuttle box, over and over. By moving its body and consequently changing
its situation, the experimenters led the dog to learn that its physical eﬀorts
could result in change.
Humans can unlearn helplessness the same way. In chapter 1, we learned
that you don’t have to deal with a stressor directly to deal with the stress
itself. Helplessness works the same way. When you feel trapped, free yourself
from anything, and it will teach your body that you are not helpless.
For instance, feeling helpless and hopeless after watching news about the
state of international politics? Don’t distract yourself or numb out; do a thing.
Do yard work or gardening, to care for your small patch of the world. Take
food to somebody who needs a little boost. Take your dog to the park. Show
up at a Black Lives Matter march. You might even call your government
representative. That’s great. That’s participation. You’re not helpless. Your
goal is not to stabilize the government—that’s not your job (unless you
happen to be a person whose job that is, in which case you still need to deal
with the stress, as well as the stressor!)—your goal is to stabilize you, so that
you can maintain a sense of eﬃcacy, so that you can do the important stuﬀ
your family and your community need from you. As the saying goes,
“Nobody can do everything, but everybody can do something.” And
“something” is anything that isn’t nothing.
It’s likely that you’ve received the message that when you’re feeling
overwhelmed with helplessness it’s because you just can’t be “rational,” you’re
just overreacting, and the problem is your “mindset” or your weakness or just
generally your fault. You should be able to do just as well as any man, and if
you can’t, the problem is you.
It’s not true, and the people who say it is are gaslighting you. The truth is
you learned helplessness from experiences of being helpless.
We unlearn helplessness by doing a thing—a thing that uses our body. Go
for a walk. Scream into a pillow. Or, as Carrie Fisher put it, “Take your
broken heart, make it into art.” Reverse the eﬀects of helplessness by creating
a context where you can do a thing.
In the animated movie Finding Nemo, we get to know Dory the blue tang,
a friendly ﬁsh who suﬀers from short-term memory loss. Famously voiced by

[PDF page 104]

Ellen DeGeneres, Dory advises her friends to “just keep swimming” when
things are diﬃcult. She even sings a song about it. In Finding Dory, we learn
(spoiler) that it was her parents who taught her that even with her short-term
memory loss, there was always a way to get through a diﬃculty. If you just
keep swimming, you’ll ﬁnd your way. And when your brain wants to give up
because there’s no land in sight, you keep swimming, not because you’re
certain swimming will take you where you want to go, but to prove to
yourself that you can still swim.
3. Smash
You’re completing the cycle. You’re doing things, using your body, to remind
yourself that you are not helpless.
Step three: Smash the patriarchy. Smash it to pieces.
You smash it by making meaning—engaging with your Something Larger
in ways that heal Human Giver Syndrome.
SM ASH IN’-SO M E-PATRIARCH Y W O RKSH EET
My Something Larger is:
 
 
Something I do to engage with my Something Larger that also
smashes some patriarchy is:
 
 
 

[PDF page 105]

I’ll know I smashed some patriarchy when…(soon, certain,
positive, concrete, speciﬁc, and personal):
 
 
—
A caveat: Don’t smash with the goal of “ending the patriarchy.” You are not
going to see the end of gender inequality or racial inequality or any other
inequality. You are going to see progress, just as you can see that progress has
happened over the last hundred years. Instead, your goal—which, remember,
should be soon, certain, positive, concrete, speciﬁc, and personal—can be
something like “Buy all my friends’ birthday presents from woman-owned
stores.” Or “In every meeting, invite women to speak ﬁrst.” Or “Give my
boys a lesson each day in being a human giver.” Or just “SMASH DAILY.”
Put a reminder in your calendar. Did you smash today?
Sophie was practicing explaining the unwinnable game to Emily.
“Nobody would need this workshop if they could just spend an
hour being me. People ask if my hair is real. My doctor tells me
I’m too fat for him to take my pulse. Teenagers throw garbage at
me from their car while I’m walking down the sidewalk…”
“And yet you don’t blow up the building,” Emily said. “You’re a
frickin’ superhero.”
“Yes,” Sophie said emphatically. “Racism, sexism, sizeism,
microaggressions, macroaggressions—this system is brutal, and
there’s no beating it. It’s the Kobayashi Maru. None of us is getting
out of this alive. But I win every time because I prove my
character. Look how strong it made me. Look how smart it made
me.” She gestured down at herself. “Look how hot it made me.”
Emily nodded. “You are the new hotness.”
What Emily meant by that is the subject of the next chapter.

[PDF page 106]

—
Looking at the scale and scope of the rigging can be painful—scary and
enraging and overwhelming. No wonder people hate the word “patriarchy.”
It’s a word that exposes and names a source of pain so old and deep we’ve
learned to ignore it or treat it as if it’s how life should be. In general, “self-
help”-type books try to help people feel good, empowered, in control of their
lives, so they leave this chapter out. Acknowledging the large-scale social
forces that surround you does not necessarily feel good, empowering, or like
you’re in control.
But it’s also like looking at the climate. It’s where you live. You can’t
escape it. And you can change it only in tiny, tiny increments. If you don’t
plan for it, you won’t know when to plant and when to harvest. If you don’t
acknowledge it, you won’t notice that it’s changing, that your world is being
cooked alive, and you won’t be able to ﬁx it.
And we’re not done. There’s another enemy, one you confront each and
every day. It tells you it’s your friend, when really it’s trying to kill you slowly.
That’s what the next chapter is about.
tl;dr:
•The game is rigged. Women and girls—especially women
and girls of color—are systematically excluded from
government and other systems of power. It’s called
“patriarchy” (ugh).
•The patriarchy (ugh) says it doesn’t exist. It says that if we
struggle, it’s our own fault for not being “good enough.”
Which is gaslighting.
•Human Giver Syndrome—the contagious belief that you
have a moral obligation to give every drop of your humanity
in support of others, no matter the cost to you—thrives in
the patriarchy, the way mold thrives in damp basements.

[PDF page 107]

•The solution? SMASH. (See worksheet. 
 )

[PDF page 108]

5
THE BIKINI INDU STRIAL COM PLEX
Julie was working hard to manage her stress. She didn’t feel great,
but she was staying aﬂoat. Until she wasn’t.
Her stomach had been “oﬀ” for a few days, or maybe weeks,
but she didn’t see anything wrong when she looked in the mirror,
so she didn’t think about it. She got away with ignoring it until she
woke up in the middle of the night with cramps she couldn’t
ignore.
The family had moved—always an exhausting process—and
she spent her ﬁrst night in the new house alternately curled up in
bed, lying on the bathroom ﬂoor, or sitting on the unfamiliar toilet
while nothing happened but cold sweat, shivering, and minor but
uncontrollable…um…leakage. When she googled her symptoms,
the Internet told Julie to SEE A DOCTOR IMMEDIATELY.
Three hours later, she was being examined in the ER. They
pressed on her belly while spasms and cramps caused more
leakage. Julie was too uncomfortable to feel embarrassed, but the
word embarrassed started repeating itself in her head while they
asked questions about risk factors: poor diet, sedentary lifestyle,
Crohn’s disease, recent abdominal surgery, opioid use…no, no, no,
no, no. High stress and change of schedule? Julie felt her body
contract, her face went hot, and she started to cry. The new job,
all the tension with her husband…Doesn’t everyone go through
these things? Could these ordinary things land her in the
emergency room?

[PDF page 109]

After an unnerving scan, they had her diagnosis. It included the
word “impaction.” The good news was it was isolated and
therefore treatable with a quick, easy procedure that included the
word “scoop.” And her follow-up care included the words “bowel
retraining.”
Now she felt embarrassed. Yeah, having a poop-related ER visit
doesn’t feel super-digniﬁed, but it was worse than that. It was as
though she had failed, as though her body was substandard
because it seemed to have overreacted to the stress of her normal,
average life.
“No, it’s not a disproportionate response,” Amelia told her over
the phone the next day. “You may not have been aware of how
bad it was, but your body was. Believe it when it tells you things.”
“That sounds…I mean”—Julie hedged—“My body knows
things? It tells me things? Come on, what actually happens?”
“Your body holds on to stress,” Amelia explained unhelpfully.
“Well, why can’t it handle my perfectly normal amount of
stress?”
“Perfectly normal? You’re changing jobs, moving houses, and
maybe getting divorced—that’s facing three of the worst stressors
known to the industrialized West all at once. What exactly are you
expecting from your body?”
It turned out Julie’s expectations for her body and what it was
supposed to be were totally wrong. She thought she could measure
her wellness by the appearance of her body. Of course she did;
that’s what we’re all taught to do.
This chapter is about how Julie got it so wrong, and what she
had to learn to get it right.
—
On the day a girl is born, she may be lucky enough to have people around her
who instantly welcome every roll on her body, every wrinkle on her ﬁngers,
every blotch on her skin, and each and every hair, no matter where it is, on

[PDF page 110]

her brand-new little body. Her little body is full of needs—needs for food,
sleep, diaper changes, being held. The adults are there to listen to the distress
signals that her body sends out, and when we’re lucky, they willingly meet
those needs, no matter how sleep-deprived, busy, or desperate they feel.
Most of us are met, at our birth, with an enveloping, protective love that
holds and cherishes every inch of our bodies. In that moment and in that love,
we are ﬂawless. Beautiful.
And then.
And then we are infected with Human Giver Syndrome, which pushes girl
babies to grow into human givers—pretty, happy, calm, generous, and
attentive to the needs of others—while it pushes boy babies to be ambitious,
competitive, strong, and infallible.
Picture that girl on the day of her birth, perfect and helpless and full of
life, maybe held against the skin of a loving parent.
She’s beautiful, right? She’s perfect.
And she’s you.
Here is the secret Human Giver Syndrome doesn’t want you to know:
Nothing has changed. No matter what has happened to that body of yours
between the day you were born, beautiful and perfect, and the day you read
this, your body is still beautiful and perfect. And it is still full of needs.
And yet by the age of six, about half of girls are worried about being “too
fat.”1 By age eleven, it’s up to two-thirds, and by full adolescence almost all
girls will have engaged in some kind of “weight control” behavior.2 One
recent study of more than 4,500 adolescents found that nearly all of them (92
percent) engaged in some kind of weight-control behavior, and almost half
(44 percent) of girls engaged in unhealthy weight-control behaviors.3
It hasn’t always been like this, and it isn’t like this everywhere; it happens
because our culture makes it happen. In 1994, there was no television on the
island of Fiji; there were also no eating disorders. British and American
television were brought to the island in 1995. By 1998, 29 percent of the girls
had developed severe eating disorder symptoms. Thirteen percent developed
these symptoms within one month of the introduction of television.4

[PDF page 111]

But in a sense, it has always been like this, and it is like this everywhere.
Every culture has an “aspirational beauty ideal” that women are encouraged
to strive for. Our own grandmother told us stories from the 1930s, when her
family was so poor they lived in a house their father had built from scraps;
they were lucky to have a toilet, but it was plumbed into the middle of the
house, with no privacy. She and her sisters were thin; in fact, they had grown
up on the edge of starvation. Still, in high school the three girls scraped
together money to buy “diet aids,” which were supposed to last them a month.
The “aids” turned out to be candy (because sugar was supposed to be an
appetite suppressant) and they ate the whole box in one afternoon.
And it isn’t just white people or Western culture. Taiwanese American
Lynn Chen, founder of thickdumplingskin.com, describes explicit
expectations from her Taiwanese parents “to eat large quantities of food but
remain skinny,” which shaped her problematic relationship with food and her
body.5
And it doesn’t have to be thinness. The Jamaican “ideal woman” has lots of
curves, and girls have been known to take “chicken pills”—medication to
fatten poultry—in order to obtain those curves. But the pills contain arsenic.6
Everywhere, there is a beauty ideal, and always, there are those willing to
risk their health to attain it. Far from hearing the distress signals our body is
sending, its desperate cries for food, sleep, being held, and, in Julie’s case,
bowel movements, we relate to our bodies only in terms of its appearance.
But imagine what it would be like to live in a culture where that feeling we
had on the day we were born stayed the same all through our childhood and
into adolescence, a culture that didn’t constantly reinforce the idea that a girl’s
or woman’s body is supposed to be one speciﬁc shape and size, and if it’s not
she must, at all costs, try to make it that shape and size. What if the shape we
grew into was just accepted as the natural shape of our bodies, as lovable
each new day as it was on the day we were born? What if the body we aged
into—those of us lucky enough to grow old—was as beautiful in our own
eyes, when we looked in the mirror, as worthy of love and protection, as the
body we had on the day we were born? What if the shape of our bodies was
peripheral to our relationship with our bodies, and we could pay
compassionate attention to our body’s needs without assessing whether it
“deserves” food or love?

[PDF page 112]

What if?
This is the chapter where we teach you how to love your body.
The Bikini Industrial Complex
This is our name for the hundred-billion-dollar cluster of businesses that
proﬁt by setting an unachievable “aspirational ideal” for us, convincing us that
we both can and should—indeed we must—conform with the ideal, and then
selling us ineﬀective but plausible strategies for achieving that ideal.7 It’s like
old cat pee in the carpet, powerful and pervasive and it makes you
uncomfortable every day—but it’s invisible and no one can remember a time
when it didn’t smell. Let’s spend a few paragraphs shining a black light on it,
so you can know where the smell is coming from.
You already know that everything in the media is there to sell you thinness
—the shellacked abs in advertisements for exercise equipment, the ONE WEIRD
TRICK TO LOSE BELLY FAT clickbait when all you wanted was a weather
forecast, and princesses played by “ﬂawless” thin women on TV. The Bikini
Industrial Complex, or BIC, has successfully created a culture of immense
pressure to conform to an ideal that is literally unobtainable by almost
everyone and yet is framed not just as the most beautiful, but the healthiest
and most virtuous.
But it’s not just magazine covers and other ﬁctions that get it wrong. Even
your high school health class had it wrong. Your doctor had it wrong, because
her medical textbooks had it wrong, because the federal government had it
wrong. Like “Big Oil” and “Big Tobacco,” “Big Bikini” has lobbied
government agencies to make sure their products have the support of
Congress. The body mass index (BMI) chart and its labels—underweight,
overweight, obese, etc.—were created by a panel of nine individuals, seven of
whom were “employed by weight-loss clinics and thus have an economic
interest in encouraging use of their facilities.”8
You’ve been lied to about the relationship between weight and health so
that you will perpetually try to change your weight.

[PDF page 113]

But listen: It can be healthier to be seventy or more pounds over your
medically deﬁned “healthy weight” than just ﬁve pounds under it. A 2016
meta-analysis published in The Lancet examined 189 studies, encompassing
nearly four million people who never smoked and had no diagnosed medical
issues. It found that people labeled “obese” by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) have lower health risk than those the CDC
categorized as “underweight.” The study also found that being “overweight”
according to the CDC is lower risk than being at the low end of the “healthy”
range, as deﬁned by the U.S. federal government and the World Health
Organization (WHO). 9
Another meta-analysis even found that people in the BMI category labeled
“overweight” may live longer than people in any other category, and the
highest predictable mortality rate might be among those labeled
“underweight.”10
“What?” you ask, in disbelief.
“Exactly!” we respond.
“What?” you ask again.
“I know!” we reply. “It’s bananas!”
Even research that describes itself as contradicting these meta-analyses and
conﬁrming that “overweight” is bad concedes, “We do not yet have

[PDF page 114]

convincing data from randomized controlled trials in humans that methods
used for promoting weight loss among obese persons prolong life [emphasis
original].”11 Translation: Even if you lose weight by buying whatever advice
they’re selling (and there’s no scientiﬁc reason to believe you will), don’t
expect to live longer. Taking it even further, the newest research is suggesting
doctors warn middle-aged and older patients against losing weight, because
the increasingly well-established dangers of ﬂuctuations in weight outweigh
any risk associated with a high but stable weight.12
And yet weight stigma is so deeply entrenched that even the researchers
who study health and weight are prone to “scientiﬁc weightism,” the
empirically unsound assumption that thin is good and fat is bad.13 It leads
physicians and scientists to write sentences like “It is well established that
weight loss, by any method, is beneﬁcial for individuals with diabetes.”14
“By any method”? Tuberculosis? Radiation therapy? Internment camp?
Amputation? Come on.
Weight and health. Not the same thing.
—
Part of the nonlinear relationship between BMI and health is due to the fact
that people vary naturally in their body shape and size—just look at
photographer Howard Schatz’s 2002 book Athlete, illustrating the vast and
beautiful range of body shapes and sizes of Olympic athletes.15 Every one of
those people, from the tiniest gymnast to the biggest weight lifter, is at the
absolute peak of their sport. Health comes in every shape and size; some
people are healthiest at a lower BMI and some are healthiest at a higher BMI.
But part of this is because the BMI is nonsense as a measure of personal
health. It’s literally just a ratio of height to weight, which is why a doctor told
one of Emily’s students—an internationally competitive ﬁgure skater, i.e., a
professional athlete—that she was “overweight,” even though she was so low-
body-fat that she was skipping periods. She had so much muscle and such
dense bones that she weighed as much as a man her height. And again, even
studies that assume body fat is dangerous agree that BMI misclassiﬁes as
“healthy” half of people who are “normal or just overweight,” but who are

[PDF page 115]

nevertheless at risk for all the health issues associated with obesity.16 People
of any size can be healthy or sick; you can’t tell by looking at them.
Does the BMI chart mention that this codiﬁcation of “health” relies more
on bias than on science?17 Nope. It just labels people as “unhealthy,” ignores
the science, and gives physicians and insurance companies government
sanctioning to collect fees for treatment of this “disease.”18
And we all believe it, because our culture has primed us to judge fat
people as lazy and selﬁsh.
But it’s even bigger than that. Here’s how deep it goes:
Amelia conducts a children’s choir, and she has to teach her kids to
breathe. At ten, eight, even six years old, they already believe that bellies are
supposed to be ﬂat and hard, and so they hold their stomachs in. You can’t
breathe deeply, all the way, without relaxing your abdomen, and you can’t
sing if you can’t breathe. So Amelia has to teach children to breathe. Amelia’s
young singers show that the BIC doesn’t just teach us to ignore our needs for
food and love; it doesn’t even want us to breathe. Not all the way.
Relax your belly. It’s supposed to be round. The Bikini Industrial Complex
has been gaslighting you.
We’re not saying the people or companies that constitute the Bikini
Industrial Complex are out to get you. Frankly, we don’t think they’re smart
enough to have created this screwed-up system on purpose. But we’re far
from the ﬁrst to recognize there’s money to be made by establishing and
enforcing impossible standards by which we’re told to measure ourselves.
Stigma Is the Health Hazard
What is the cost of the Bikini Industrial Complex’s success?
There is, of course, the ﬁnancial cost: the aforementioned hundred-billion-
dollar global industry thrives on our body dissatisfaction, and the less
eﬀective it is at making our bodies “ﬁt,” the more money it makes, as we try
product after product, trend after trend.

[PDF page 116]

And there is opportunity cost: With the time and money we spend on
worrying about the shape of our bodies and attempting to make them “ﬁt,”
what else might we accomplish? Along with that comes “self-regulatory
fatigue”; if you’re using up decision-making and attention-focusing cognitive
resources on choices about food, clothes, exercise, makeup, body hair,
“toxins,” and fretting about your body’s failures, what are you too exhausted
to care about, that you would otherwise prioritize?
There’s also the chronic, low-level stress—like the rats with tilted cages
and ﬂashing lights—of navigating an environment ﬁlled with images of the
ideal and people who believe in it. Even if you don’t buy in, they’ll be there to
say, “How nice for you that you don’t care,” or “No, don’t give up on
yourself!” or “Aren’t you worried about your health? What about your (my)
insurance premiums?” What they’re really saying is, “How dare you? If I have
to follow the rules, then so do you. Get back in line.” As body activist Jes
Baker says, “When a fat chick who hasn’t done the work, who hasn’t tried to
ﬁx her body, who doesn’t have any interest in the gospel we so zealously
believe in, stands up and says: I’M HAPPY!…we freak the fuck out.
Because: that bitch just broke the rules. She just cut in front of us in line. She
just unwittingly ripped us oﬀ. And she essentially made our lifetime of work
totally meaningless.”19
That “freak-out” leads to another cost: the discrimination. People of size
are paid less at work, experience more bullying at school—not just from
other kids, but from teachers—and have their symptoms dismissed or ignored
by doctors, and thus go longer without appropriate diagnosis and treatment
when they have actual medical problems.20
Then there is the cost in human health and life: Dieting—especially “yo-yo
dieting,” repeatedly gaining and losing weight—ultimately causes changes in
brain functioning that increase insulin and leptin resistance (causing weight
gain, which leads to dieting, and so on), which leads to actual disease. And
eating disorders have the highest mortality of any mental illness—higher even
than depression—killing 250,000 people a year.21 The thin ideal makes us
sick. And it kills some of us.
And although a rising proportion of men struggle with body dysmorphia,
and the cultural pressures around men’s bodies are intensifying (“dad bod”

[PDF page 117]

notwithstanding), this remains a distinctly gendered issue.22 It is women’s
time, money, mental energy, opportunity, health, and lives that are being
drained away in the endless pursuit of a “better” body, and it starts as soon as
we “gender” a child’s toys. Very young girls’ exposure to dolls with unrealistic
body types increases their desire to be thin.23 This despite the fact that the
Lancet meta-analysis found that the health risk associated with low or high
BMI was “far greater”—quoting the researchers—for men than for women.
And yet who gets more ﬂak from their culture and even, yes, from their
doctors about their weight? Women, of course—twice as much as men.24
Why? Because we’re the “human givers”; we’re the ones with a moral
obligation to be pretty—that is, to conform to the aspirational ideal.
It gets worse. The body ideal is built into the physical infrastructure of
society, from the size and shape of airplane seats to the weight-bearing
capacity of medical tables. One friend of ours couldn’t get a mammogram
because the machine at the doctor’s oﬃce didn’t hold over 250 pounds—
outrageously inexcusable, when 5 to 10 percent of American women over the
age of forty weigh more than 250 pounds.25
This grotesque discrimination means that it is dangerous to be a fat person
in the world—not because of the fat, but because of the daily discrimination,
exclusion, and stigmatization.
Reasonable people may disagree about the speciﬁc relationship between
weight and health. But there is no reasonable case to be made, no evidence at
all, that stigma is anything but actively harmful. Which is why…
It W ould Be Nice to Be Thin
Owen Elliot, daughter of Cass Elliot of the band the Mamas and the Papas,
has said of her mother, “She accepted who she was, a sexy woman who was
never short of boyfriends, but I think if she could have been thinner, she
would have. I’m overweight right now and I’m still beautiful. But God, it
would be nice to be thin and I think that’s where she was at, too.”26
That fundamental ambivalence between accepting your body and changing
your body is both common and rational. Despite the accumulating evidence

[PDF page 118]

that people of diﬀerent shapes and sizes can be healthy, the stigma around
body shape pervades every domain of our lives, and the prejudice, bias, false
beliefs, and stigma against fat and fat people can literally kill you.27 And this
form of discrimination is not just legal but normalized, rationalized, by the
incorrect idea that fat is a disease.
So yes indeed, it would be nice to be thin, because it would privilege us
with the gift of being treated like actual people, no matter what. Thin
privilege is as real as privilege associated with race, gender, and class.
Women of color would face less adversity if they were white. Trans folks
would face less adversity if they were cisgender. People on the autism
spectrum would face less adversity if they were neurotypical. And, yes, fat
people would face less adversity if they were thin. And none of those folks
chose to be who they are. They can only choose to embrace who they are and
try to tolerate living in a world that doesn’t tolerate them.
Living in a body that is outside the “norm” can be a hassle when you’re
clothes shopping, frustrating when you’re navigating public transportation,
and exhausting when you’re just trying to buy groceries without people
oﬀering their opinions—silently or otherwise. It is experienced as another
“chronic stressor,” like the rats who come home to ﬁnd water poured all over
their nests. And that stress accumulates.
The urge to conform is perfectly rational. And the BIC lies to you, tells you
you could conform if you worked harder, had more discipline, on and on,
bullshitbullshit, and the stress works its way from the outside to the inside.
Even people who conform, more or less, to the aspirational ideal experience
this stress. When they can’t credibly be told they have to be thinner, thin
people are told they should “sculpt” or “tone” their abs or arms or butt or
thighs. And everyone, regardless of size, is supposed to fret over food choices
and exercise and clothes that make you “look fat” in an eﬀort to ﬁt the
precisely molded aspirational ideal. We’ve been taught that our bodies reﬂect
our morality and indeed our very worth as human beings. Fat people are
viewed as “lazy, glutinous [sic], greedy, immoral, uncontrolled, stupid, ugly,
lacking in will power, primitive.”28 Thin people, by contrast, are self-
controlled and nice and clean and smart. The stakes for conforming feel
excruciatingly high.

[PDF page 119]

People who tell you they’re worried about your fat may say—they may
even believe—they’re worried about your health. But since fat isn’t a disease,
what they’re really worried about is your social life. Being accepted by your
culture. It would be nice to be thin.
W HY THINNESS?
As Naomi W olf puts it, “A culture xated on female thinness is
not an obsession about female beauty, but an obsession about
female obedience.” Thin bodies are the bodies of women who
behave themselves.
Like so many toxic norms of the twenty-rst century, the
thin ideal is a by-product of the Industrial Revolution. Before
that, a softer, rounder, plumper female was the beauty
standard, because it was only the rich women who could aﬀord
the luxurious food and freedom from manual labor that allowed
them to accumulate the abundant curves of the women in
Rubens’s paintings. But in the nineteenth century, with the rise
of the middle class, it became fashionable for a man to be able
to aﬀord a wife who was too weak to work. It was a status
symbol, an advertisement of wealth, for a man to have a wife
who not only didn’t but couldn’t contribute to the household
income. “Delicate” and “fragile” became feminine virtues.
This is in contradiction of everything evolution would have a
woman be: robust, strong, able healthfully to conceive, gestate,
birth, breastfeed, and carry multiple oﬀspring.
So that, friends, is where the thin ideal originates—in the
basic assumption that a woman is a man’s property, his status
symbol. Because: patriarchy. (U gh.)

[PDF page 120]

Sophie has two sets of clothes—three if you count the Uhura
cosplay. She has a work wardrobe, full of the kinds of things
people expect a professional to wear, which she considers just as
much a costume as the Uhura dress. And she has the leggings and
screen-printed T-shirts that say things like “Joss Is My Master
Now” and “What Would Geordi Do?”
So when the academic department for which she was consulting
invited her out to dinner at the start of her gig, we went shopping
with her.
Not many women make it to adulthood with as solid a sense of
their own beauty as Sophie. She is a conﬁdent, body-positive
woman of size. But then she has to go out in the world and try on
dresses. This time she went to a fancy-pants department store,
with valet parking and complimentary glasses of sparkling water.
She chose a few things and went to try them on. She showed us a
few options, including one truly outstandingly hot one, then went
to try on the next dress.
Which is when we overheard two other women just outside the
dressing room. They were talking in hushed voices, but still plainly
audible.
The ﬁrst lady said, “It’s like she doesn’t even care! I’m sorry, I
get up at ﬁve-thirty every morning and sweat my butt oﬀ on the
treadmill. If she’s too lazy or doesn’t even respect herself enough
to—” and at that point Emily’s ears ﬁlled with the white noise of
rageful blood pounding in her head.
Through the roar, she heard the other lady say, “I’m just
genuinely worried about her health, you know? Like, she’s a
walking heart attack!”
“And now our taxes are subsidizing her slow death by Twinkies!
Hashtag thanks, Obama!”
Tittering laughter.
We looked at each other. Emily looked at the door of Sophie’s
dressing room. Amelia went over to the ladies, because she’s the
one who goes over to people.

[PDF page 121]

“We can hear you,” she said.
They looked at her, uncomprehending.
“That’s our friend you’re talking about,” Amelia said, and the
penny dropped. They stammered and looked abashed, but also
unimpressed—Amelia is herself not thin, which makes her lazy
and a walking heart attack, too, so why would they care about her
opinion? Still, Amelia continued on an angry tirade, explaining
Health at Every Size and that size discrimination is the last haven
of sanctioned prejudice, and Emily just stood there, struggling to
believe this kind of thing actually happens.
As Amelia’s voice was starting to get to making-a-scene volume,
Sophie came out of the dressing room wearing her own clothes,
with the totally hot dress slung over one arm.
“Should we leave?” Emily asked her.
“Oh, we’re leaving,” Sophie said, loud enough for the ladies to
hear, then winked at Emily. “But ﬁrst I’m buying this hot dress.”
Three slow deep breaths later, Sophie was signing the sales slip
with us right behind her, and the uncomfortable ladies in a clutch
by the dressing room.
Emily said, “This is going to be a really funny story, a few
months from now.”
“It’s already funny,” Sophie said.
And she wore that totally hot dress to the dinner, where she
would meet the love of her life.
Your New “W eight Loss Goal”
“Just give me a number! What should I weigh????” you ask.
Wouldn’t it be great if it were that simple?
On top of all the individual variability we discussed, another major reason
why it’s not that simple is something called “defended weight.” Just as some
people are night owls and others are larks and our body rhythms change

[PDF page 122]

across our life-span, so some people are big and others are small, and our
bodies change across our life-span. The basic shape and size of your adult
body has what neuroscientist Sandra Aamodt calls a “defended weight” that it
will protect. Eat a little extra one day, your appetite will be smaller the next
day. Starve yourself for three months to ﬁt the bridesmaid dress your best
friend got you…then eat like you’ve been starving for three months, until
your body returns to its defended weight. Defended weight tends to go up as
we age and almost never goes down. Only a very small fraction of the
population can lose weight and sustain that weight loss through diet and
exercise, establishing a new defended weight.29
How frustrating is this information? Is part of you still certain there’s a
diﬀerent weight you ought to be, and could be if only you had the discipline?
Back in chapter 2, we talked about “when to quit.” We suggested you make
a grid—short- and long-term beneﬁts of keeping this goal, and short- and
long-term beneﬁts of letting go of this goal. Try that with whatever your
current body goal is.
Or you can listen to your inner voice, which has probably been begging for
mercy for years.
You might choose to keep trying to change your body. It’s your body and
your decision. At least now you can adjust your expectations about just how
diﬃcult and long the eﬀort will be.
You might choose to let go of trying to conform to the culturally
constructed aspirational beauty ideal—again, your body, your choice. Then
comes the hard part. An hour later, the BIC will be arguing with you,
blaming and judging you, pressuring you to get back in line.
You’re going to have to meet the BIC in daily combat, for your individual
and our collective well-being. So let’s look at four real-life strategies for
making it through the fray.
Strategy 1: M ess Acceptance
Multiple approaches to combating the BIC have been established over the last
few decades, and a strong and growing foundation of research shows they’re

[PDF page 123]

eﬀective at improving health, preventing eating disorders, and reducing the
mood and anxiety problems that accompany body self-criticism. Though the
approaches vary, they also have a lot in common: they all encourage you to
(1) practice body acceptance, (2) embrace body diversity, and (3) listen to
your body.
Those things are good for you.30 You should deﬁnitely try them.
But neither of us has ever met any woman whose relationship with her
body was not in some way equivocal—and no wonder. It’s diﬃcult to
maintain body acceptance in the midst of the BIC, where you’re surrounded
by images of the ideal and by loved ones who say, “But you’re going to lose
the weight, right?”
Ambivalence is normal. So rather than aiming for “body acceptance,”
practice “mess acceptance.” Turn toward the mess of noisy, contradictory
thoughts and feelings with kindness and compassion. You know what’s true
now—your body size doesn’t dictate your health; the Bikini Industrial
Complex doesn’t care about your health; it’s all just patriarchy and capitalism
and stuﬀ—but knowing what’s true doesn’t magically cure it. Knowledge may
be half the battle, but only half.
When you engage in physical activity, you know it’s good for you, because:
completing the cycle and also: doing a thing. You also know that most people
probably assume you’re trying to “lose weight” or “get in shape,” and part of
you might still actively want to change the shape of your body. That’s all
perfectly normal. Move your body anyway—because it really is good for you
—and smile benevolently at the mess. Some days it will be messy as hell,
other days it will be calm and clear, and every day is just part of the intensely
body-neurotic world you happen to live in.
Strategy 2: You Are the New Hotness
All the evidence-based models also include some redeﬁnition of “beauty.”
When we reconstruct our own standard of beauty with a deﬁnition that comes
from our own hearts and includes our bodies as they are right now, we can
turn toward our bodies with kindness and compassion.

[PDF page 124]

Easier said than done.
Amelia is vain about pictures of her conducting, in which she inevitably
has her mouth wide open and her hair is a sweaty wreck. Emily watches
herself on TV and worries that her chin is too pointy because one time, years
ago, somebody said it was. Neither of us has ever had the skinny proportions
of a model, and we watched our mom (who was model-thin before she
gestated two seven-pound babies at the same time) look at her reﬂection in
dressing room mirrors and cry at what she saw there. What she saw there is
very much like what we see in our own reﬂections now.
Which is why we play the “New Hotness” game, a strategy for teaching
ourselves to let go of body self-criticism and shift to self-kindness.
One day, Amelia was in a dressing room of a very fancy boutique, trying
on gowns for a performance she had coming up. Attire for women conductors
is hard to ﬁnd: solid black with long sleeves, formal, professional, yet not
frumpy is an unlikely combination. Finding all of this in her size, right on the
boundary between “straight” sizes and “plus” sizes, is even more diﬃcult. So
there she was at the fancy store, and she tried on a dress that looked so
amazingly good that she texted Emily a dress selﬁe, with a caption
paraphrasing Will Smith in Men in Black II: I AM THE NEW HOTNESS.
And now “new hotness” is our texting shorthand for looking fabulous
without reference to the socially constructed ideal.
We recommend it. It’s fun.
Maybe you don’t look like you used to, or like you used to imagine you
should; but how you look today is the new hotness. Even better than the old
hotness.
Wearing your new leggings today? You are the new hotness.
Hair longer or shorter, or a diﬀerent color or style? New hotness.
Saggy belly skin from that baby you birthed? New hotness.
Gained twenty pounds while ﬁnishing school? New hotness.
Skin gets new wrinkles because you lived another year? New hotness.
Scar tissue following knee replacement surgery? New hotness.
Amputation following combat injury? New hotness.
Mastectomy following breast cancer? New hotness.

[PDF page 125]

The point is, you deﬁne and redeﬁne your body’s worth, on your own
terms. Again and again, you turn toward your body with kindness and
compassion.
It’s not necessary to turn toward your body with love and aﬀection—love
and aﬀection are frosting on the cake of body acceptance, and if they work
for you, go for it.31 All your body requires of you is that you turn toward it
with kindness and compassion, with nonjudgment and plain-vanilla
acceptance of all your contradictory emotions, beliefs, and longings.
We’re not saying that “beautiful” is what your body should be; we’re saying
beautiful is what your body already is.
Strategy 3: Everybody Is the New Hotness
Writer, comedian, and fat-positive activist Lindy West discovered her new
hotness from exposure to positive images of fat bodies, and recommends that
other women “look at pictures of fat women on the Internet until they don’t
make you uncomfortable anymore.” She says Leonard Nimoy’s The Full Body
Project “came to me like a gift.” She had never seen fat bodies like hers
“presented without scorn…honored instead of lampooned…displayed as
objects of beauty instead of punch lines.” And she asked herself, “What if I
could just decide I was valuable and it would be true?” And she felt it
reshaping her brain. She later discovered the research that demonstrates that
mere exposure to certain body types makes people prefer those body types.
At the end of some of her talks, Emily leads what she calls “The Beautiful
Activity.” She has a set of ﬁfty PowerPoint slides, each with the image of
someone who goes by the pronoun “she,” along with the words “She is so
beautiful.” One at a time, going around the room, participants look at the
image they’re presented with and say out loud, “She is so beautiful.” Then the
next slide comes up and the next person says, “She is so beautiful.” And the
next slide, and the next person. There are women of every skin tone and hair
texture, women with or without armpit hair, women in wheelchairs or with
prosthetic limbs, women with single or double mastectomies, transgender

[PDF page 126]

women, androgynous women, women in burkas, women of every size,
women of every age from their teens to their nineties.
The original idea of the exercise was that everyone in the room would see
someone who looks like herself, and hear someone declare that person
beautiful. But it turned out, even more powerful was the feeling of dissonance
participants experience, seeing a body that they’ve been taught to perceive
with aversion and being challenged to try on the idea that that body is
beautiful. Emily has led this activity with everyone from college students to
seasoned therapists to medical providers, and the response is the same: tears
and an astonished awareness of how uncomfortable it is, at ﬁrst, to view
non-“ideal” bodies without judgment…and of how quickly it becomes a
source of joy.
You will ﬁnish this chapter and go out into the world and notice the
diversity of bodies around you…and you will still have these reﬂexive,
judgmental thoughts about the people who don’t conform to the aspirational
ideal, or those envious, contemptuous thoughts about the people who do, or
those self-critical, scolding thoughts about the ways the world tells you you
fall short. It will happen any time you’re out in public—on a train or a bus,
standing in line at the checkout counter, at a party, at a work meeting, in a
classroom. You’ll notice other people’s bodies, and you’ll have an emotional
reaction to them. And then you might even have emotional reactions to your
emotional reactions—“Darn it, I shouldn’t think that!”
That’s all part of the mess. Change happens gradually. Your brain has been
soaking in the BIC for decades; and any time you step outside your door,
you’re back in it; any time you turn on a television, you’re back in it; any time
you put clothes on or take clothes oﬀ, you’re back in it. Just notice it, as you’d
notice a ﬂeck of dust ﬂoating through the air. Utterly neutral. No need to do
anything about it. Smile kindly at the mess. And know what’s true: Everyone
is the new hotness. You are the new hotness. So is she. So are they. So are
we.

[PDF page 127]

Strategy 4: “Hi Body, W hat Do You Need?”
Finally, turn your attention away from the mirror and other people’s bodies,
and notice what it feels like inside your body. Greet your internal sensations
with the same kindness and compassion you practiced when you thought
about the shape of your body.
When an infant squirms or cries because something about her body feels
uncomfortable, the grown-ups have to ﬁgure out what the issue is, and we
teach the infant what her body’s sensations mean.32 We coo, “Hi, honey,
what’s wrong? What do you need? Are you hungry? Tired? Lonely? Oh,
you’re hungry, huh?”
And the baby learns that that speciﬁc uncomfortable sensation means
“hungry.” Another uncomfortable sensation means “wet.” A diﬀerent
uncomfortable sensation is “lonely.”
But even as she grows more familiar with her body’s internal sensations,
she absorbs contradictory cultural messages about how she should feel about
her body. The adults say things like “Look at that cute fat belly! I’m gonna
zerbert that belly!” about her belly, and they also say, “Ugh, look at this fat
belly, I’m so gross,” about their own belly.
Even before she can read or speak, she watches commercials and sees the
magazine covers at the grocery store, and though she may never talk about it
with any of the people in her life, she is absorbing the idea that her body is
not already beautiful and that if she doesn’t make it beautiful, she doesn’t
automatically deserve food or love or rest or health. And as a budding
“human giver,” she learns that her body isn’t for her, it’s for other people.
Other people’s pleasure, other people’s desire, other people’s acceptance or
rejection.
Many of us have grown into world-class ignorers of our own needs, just as
we were taught to be. We don’t even notice that we’re ignoring our needs.
Our bodies are sending us all kinds of signals, but we live from the neck up,
only attending to the noise in our heads and shutting out the noise coming
from the other 95 percent of our internal experience.
Imagine that your body is the body of someone who needs your care, like
an infant. It feels weird and wrong to a lot of us at ﬁrst, but give it a try.

[PDF page 128]

Instead of just looking at your body to evaluate her well-being (we know that
you can’t tell anything about a person’s health by the shape or size of their
body), turn to her and ask her how she feels: “What’s wrong, honey? Are you
hungry? Thirsty? Tired? Lonely?” She can deﬁnitely tell you, if you listen.
You might have to stop what you’re doing, take a slow breath, focus on the
sensation of your weight on the ﬂoor or the chair, and actually ask out loud,
“What do you need?” You may receive the answer as an instantaneous
knowing, or as a physical sensation you need to interpret, or as words in your
mind. But she will give you an answer.
Though the details of her needs change as you grow—How much sleep,
and when? Loving attention from whom? What kind of food?—the
fundamentals do not. Your body needs to breathe and to sleep. She needs
food. She needs love. She dies without them. And there is nothing she has to
do, no shape or size she has to be, before she “deserves” food and love and
sleep. It’s not her fault if she’s sick or injured. She’s still the astonishing
creature she was on the day she was born, a source of joy for those who care
about her. She’s yours.
She’s you.
Julie had literally never thought about what her body felt like. She
paid attention to what it looked like, and, like most of us, spent a
lot of time and eﬀort on making it look thin enough; she followed
diets she read about, did workouts suggested by ﬁtness gurus, and
avoided clothes with horizontal stripes.
But her prescribed bowel retraining forced her to pay attention
to how her body felt instead of how it looked.
A lot of body-positive talk emphasizes loving your body for
“what it does” rather than how it looks, which is great as far as it
goes. But it’s not so helpful for Julie or anyone living with chronic
pain or illness. Even though her body looked a lot like she thought
healthy bodies were supposed to look, it had failed pretty
catastrophically to do what bodies were supposed to do.
So she had to start from scratch, rebuilding her relationship
with her body according to rules set by her body. There were
guidelines to follow about food, but instead of a list of foods she

[PDF page 129]

could and couldn’t eat, she was told to pay attention to how
various foods felt in her body. It turned out what made her body
feel good was radically diﬀerent from any diet she had followed.
There were instructions for way more sleep and exercise than she
had ever had before, and how the hell was she going to be good to
her body and also live her actual life?
She realized this question—this tradeoﬀ between her body’s
needs and her life—was what put her in the hospital in the ﬁrst
place.
In order to make this work, she would need help. A lot of help.
—
Bodies are imperfect, and sometimes they let us down. They are susceptible
to disease and breakage and entropy. Our bodies can disappoint us, and the
world can punish us when our bodies aren’t what they “should” be. So we are
not suggesting that you “love your body,” like that’s an easy ﬁx. We’re
suggesting you be patient with your body and with your feelings about your
body.
Your body is not the enemy. The real enemy is out there—the Bikini
Industrial Complex. It is trying sneakily to convince you that you are the
problem, that your body is the enemy, that your body is inadequate, which
makes you a failure.
This stuﬀ is diﬃcult and messy. After you ﬁnish this chapter, you are going
to have dinner with friends and hear them talking about calories and fat and
whether or not they “deserve” to eat dessert or how nice it must be for you
“not to care what you eat.” You are going to hear family members criticize
themselves or others for the way they’ve “let themselves go.” You’re going to
want to explain to them that people don’t need to earn the pleasure of
delicious food, that de-prioritizing conformation with the culturally
constructed ideal is not failure, and that “fat” doesn’t mean “unhealthy.”
Sometimes you’ll say these things; sometimes you won’t. Sometimes you
won’t want the argument. Both choices are okay; it’s all just part of the mess.
We’ll conclude this chapter with this example of our own mess.

[PDF page 130]

At the same time that Emily was working on this chapter, she was also—
oh, God—losing weight, in preparation for a large professional event, to
which she had been invited as a keynote speaker. She knows from the
research and from experience that she is perceived diﬀerently depending on
her weight, and she wanted to be perceived in the thin way. So one Friday
morning, she spent three hours writing about body acceptance, and then she
went upstairs and, because it was Friday, she weighed herself.
Then she called Amelia and said, “This is so screwed up! On the one hand,
I really will be taken more seriously as a professional and an expert if I
conform more closely to the aspirational ideal. On the other hand, my eﬀorts
to conform to that ideal are in opposition to the very message about which I
have been invited to speak, as an expert.”
“Yep, it’s a mess,” Amelia agreed. “But it’s also the new hotness.”
—
We started, back in Part I, with the resources we carry with us into this
battle, the resources that stop the bleeding. Here in Part II, we’ve described
the tricky nature of this enemy, who tries to convince us it is our ally even as
it shanks us between our ribs. In Part III we’ll describe, in concrete, speciﬁc
detail, how to win. We’ll describe what that daily battle for just a little more
ground, just a little more peace, looks and feels like. And we’ll tell you about
the personal, practical, and everyday things you can do to grow mighty.
tl;dr:
•The “Bikini Industrial Complex” is a hundred-billion-dollar
industry that tries to convince us that our bodies are the
enemy, when, in reality, the Bikini Industrial Complex is
itself the enemy.
•Bias against people of size can be more dangerous to our
health than the actual size of our bodies. And many of the

[PDF page 131]

things we do to try to change our bodies make our health
worse.
•It is normal—nearly universal—to feel ambivalent about
your body, wanting to accept and love your body as it is
and, at the same time, wanting to change it to conform to
the culturally constructed aspirational ideal.
•Solutions: Embrace the mess. See yourself as “the new
hotness.” Practice seeing everyone as “the new hotness.”
And tune in to your body’s needs.

[PDF page 132]

PART III
 
W ax O n, W ax O ﬀ

[PDF page 133]

6
CONNECT
Sophie refers to herself as a Grown-Ass Woman. She supports
herself ﬁnancially, lives alone, and is your textbook independent
female. She takes pride in knowing she can do things for herself,
that she doesn’t need anyone. She has family and friends for
company, and she enjoys the romantic thrill of dating, but she
doesn’t share her life with anyone long-term. She wasn’t all that
interested in a relationship.
Until Bernard.
She met him while she was consulting at a big, famous technical
university, helping them design more inclusive STEM programs. At
the department dinner, she approached one of the few empty
chairs, next to a man with frizzy hair.
“Is this seat taken?” she asked.
He looked up at her, clearly distracted by whatever he had been
reading, and their eyes locked and she had no idea what he said.
His eyes were sparkly and his expression was warm and
welcoming. He had freckles. She felt like the earth had shifted out
from under her; without any warning, she was suddenly standing
in a new place.
He gestured to the empty seat, so she sat. Her stomach was
suddenly full of butterﬂies.
“I’m Bernard,” the guy said, holding out a hand to shake.
When Sophie took his hand, she felt a zing of electricity. She
giggled—giggled! The Grown-Ass Woman giggled. It was too late,

[PDF page 134]

the giggle was out, and now he would think she was someone who
giggled. She cleared her throat and took a deep breath to focus her
mind, and said her name.
“I know.” Bernard nodded, friendly and welcoming. Later, he
would confess that he was dismissing her as out of his league, and
that if he had actually thought he stood a chance with her, he’d
have been a nervous wreck.
After the dinner, and throughout her time at the school, Sophie
would pass Bernard in the hall with a friendly wave and smile,
and there was always that same zing of electricity, the same
butterﬂies.
“Why?” she asked the butterﬂies. “Why him?”
She had learned that Bernard was divorced, had kids, was
therefore broke and laden with emotional baggage and had no
time in his life for someone new. That was not what she was
looking for. She was looking for laughter and travel and
unencumbered fun.
The butterﬂies didn’t care. “He has pretty eyes!” they enthused.
“There’s a boy,” she ﬁnally admitted to Emily. “And there are
butterﬂies. And I don’t understand because I am a Grown-Ass
Woman. I don’t need this man and all his problems in my life.”
Emily said, “Well, the science says—”
Sophie interrupted, “Emily Nagoski, you are not going to tell me
the science says women need men. You, the feminist, the sex
educator, the science nerd, are not going to tell me that science
says women aren’t complete without men.”
“Oh geez, of course not!” Emily said.
“Good,” Sophie said.
“But,” Emily pressed, “the butterﬂies know something you don’t.”
This chapter is about what the butterﬂies know.
—

[PDF page 135]

“When you were little, who held you when you cried?”
That’s the question therapist and researcher Sue Johnson asks her clients.
If she were a nutritionist, Sue might ask, “When you were little, what did
you eat when you were hungry?”
People who grew up in a home where food was abundant, nourishing, and
free of guilt and shame can answer that question with pleasure. People who
grew up in homes where food was either scarce, low in quality, or laden with
guilt and shame would answer it very diﬀerently, would feel very diﬀerently
just thinking about it.
Social connection is a form of nourishment, like food. Just as our early
experiences shape our present-day relationship with food, so our early
experiences of connection shape our present-day relationships with other
people. Our speciﬁc nutritional needs change over the course of our life-span,
but the fundamental need for food does not; similarly, our need for
connection changes across our life-spans, but our fundamental need for
connection does not. And the culture we live in constrains the food choices
available to us. Same goes for connection.
Being alone as an infant isn’t just lonely; it’s a matter of life and death—
and it’s not just that babies die if they aren’t fed and kept warm and held out
of reach of predatory carnivores. Babies can literally die of loneliness itself,
even if their other needs are met.1 Contact with another person is a basic
biological need; loneliness is a form of starvation.
Even as adults, connection nourishes us in a literal, physiological way,
regulating our heart rates and respiration rates, inﬂuencing the emotional
activation in our brains, shifting our immune response to injuries and wounds,
changing our exposure to stressors, and modulating our stress response.2 We
literally sicken and die without connection. A 2015 meta-analysis,
encompassing seventy diﬀerent studies and over three million research
participants from around the globe, found that social isolation and loneliness
increased a person’s odds of an early death by 25 to 30 percent.3 In
describing the results of a 2018 study on the health impact of loneliness, a
chief medical oﬃcer for an insurance company described loneliness as having
“the same impact on mortality as smoking ﬁfteen cigarettes a day.”4 Also in
2018, the United Kingdom’s government created a Commission on

[PDF page 136]

Loneliness, framing it as a public health issue with the same health impact as
living with a chronic disease like diabetes.5 Residing in the beating heart of
every adult human is that infant who will literally die if she isn’t connected
with other people.
And yet the “common wisdom” is that individual development should be a
linear progression from dependence to autonomy. When psychologists began
formulating theories about human development, they concluded that it’s
“immature” to depend on others. The best, strongest, sanest, smartest, and
most grown-up people, they said, are the ones who don’t need anyone to do
anything for them.
Worse, Human Giver Syndrome says that path is not for everyone. Imagine
an infant boy who learns to talk and walk and feed himself and control when
he poops and pees; he learns to read and count and do chemistry; and he
shifts from wanting to be held by his mommy to wanting to leave home and
be independent, at which point he is a full-ﬂedged human being. An infant
girl, on the other hand, is supposed to grow independent up to a point, but
then the next step is marriage and babies, at which point she is a full-ﬂedged
human giver. An identity grounded in autonomy is considered stronger,
superior, and masculine. An identity grounded in connection is weaker,
inferior, and feminine.
It remains popular wisdom that healthy people should feel 100 percent
whole, with or without a romantic partner or the approval of others or the
support of a family or community. Social connection should be a “bonus,” not
an essential component to our well-being—a supplement, not a staple. No
wonder the ﬁrst waves of feminists considered independence the ideal.
This is the heretical truth: No one is “complete” without other people—
and we mean this literally. To be complete without social connection is to be
nourished without food. It doesn’t happen. We get hungry. We get lonely. We
must feed ourselves or die. We don’t mean you “need a man” or any kind of
romantic partner. We mean you need connection in any or all of its varied
forms. And it is also true that the lifelong development of autonomy is as
innate to human nature as the drive to connect. We need both connection and
autonomy. That’s not a contradiction. Humans are built to oscillate from
connection to autonomy and back again.

[PDF page 137]

This chapter begins Part III: Wax On, Wax Oﬀ, where we describe daily
choices and actions that will ﬁght the causes of burnout—the enemies we
named in Part II.
“Wax on, wax oﬀ,” as Mr. Miyagi instructs Danny LaRusso in The Karate
Kid. “Don’t forget to breathe.” Breathing: another cycle, another oscillation—
breathe in…breathe out.
“Connection” Is Literal
As twins, we have one pure talent, an ability bestowed on us from on high,
with no training or eﬀort on our part: the three-legged race. That’s the
children’s ﬁeld-day game where you tie one kid’s left ankle to another kid’s
right ankle, and the pair runs down the ﬁeld together, racing against other
pairs of kids. At eight years old, we kicked ass at the three-legged race; we
left everyone in the dust.
The same mechanism that allowed us to synchronize on the playground
was also at work on the school bus: when one of us was being bullied and
started to cry, the other started crying, too—seemingly out of the blue. We
don’t even remember which of us was being bullied. There was no string
tying us to each other as there was on the playground; there was only the
emotional attunement that synchronized our feelings. But that attunement and
synchrony are as concrete, as real, as the string.
Science has just begun to be able to measure this phenomenon. Two-
person neuroscience (2PN) is brand new and researchers are still trying to
establish the most valid and eﬀective ways to measure, in the brain, the
experience of connected synchrony, but so far the results are astonishing.6
When people watch a movie together, their brains’ emotional responses
synchronize, even if they’re strangers. Simply sharing physical space with
someone—mere co-presence—can be enough to synchronize heartbeats. We
automatically mirror the facial expression of the person we’re talking to and
experience the emotion that goes with those expressions, and we involuntarily
match body movements and vocal pitch.7 We are all walking around co-
regulating one another all the time, synchronizing without trying, without

[PDF page 138]

even necessarily being aware that it’s happening.8 Your internal state is
profoundly contagious, and it is profoundly susceptible to “catching” the
internal states of the people around you at work and at home and at the
grocery store and on the bus.
This mutual co-regulation begins from the earliest moments of our lives,
and it shapes our brains.9 The exchange of loving looks between infant and
adult caregiver releases dopamine, a neuropeptide famous for bonding us
with others and facilitating the growth of neural connections, while the
exchange of negative looks between infant and caregiver releases cortisol, the
infamous stress hormone, which disrupts the production of neural
connections.10 You spent the ﬁrst two years of life assuming that what you
felt was what everyone around you felt—checking in with the adults around
you to see how they felt, and adopting their feelings as your own. Not by
choice; by instinct. If the grown-up holding you is calm and relaxed, then
your nervous system knows it can be calm and relaxed, too. If that grown-up
is stressed and anxious, then there must be something to be anxious about, so
your nervous system puts you in that state, too.11
By the age of two or three, a child still can’t survive on her own, but she
begins to understand that other people have internal experiences that are
separate from hers. By adolescence, she might be able to survive on her own,
but humans don’t go oﬀ alone, the way many other animals do. We stay in
social groups and develop mutual connections with our peers, which are
shaped by the ways we connected (or, more technically, “attached”) with our
caregivers as infants.
Sharing space with anyone else means sharing energy—literally.
Connection moves us at the level of our atoms. Each particle we are made of
inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced by the particle next to it in an unending chain that
exists on the smallest and largest scales you can imagine, and every scale in
between. Swing a pendulum near another pendulum that’s the same size, and
they will gradually entrain, often swinging in the same direction at the same
time. We’re made of energy. The nature of energy is to be shared, to spread,
to connect one thing to another. Sharing space with other people means that
our energy inﬂuences theirs, and theirs inﬂuences ours. It’s physics. And
psychology. And unavoidable. And amazing.

[PDF page 139]

And what does this do for us?
It’s easy to hear “Connection is important!” and think it means
something intangible, like emotional connection, gal pals cheering
you on, romantic partners listening and holding you while you
cry, and hearing your kid say, “I love you.” And it is that.
Connection is a feeling.
But it’s also pragmatic. Life is complicated and expensive and
time-consuming. We need help.
Julie needed help. Her—oh, God—“bowel retraining” required,
among other things, half an hour every day for—oh, God—“toilet
time.” To create that time, she had to oﬄoad some of the other
things she was doing, things that still needed to get done, just not
by her.
Her mom showed up for her; she cooked big meals on Sundays
and brought them over, frozen, in containers. Diana’s friends’
parents showed up, helping with carpooling. To Julie’s
amazement, all her friends showed up. One friend spontaneously
organized a shared calendar, where everyone volunteered to bring
food on diﬀerent days or take Diana out.
You know who else showed up? Her husband.
It’s time to introduce you to Jeremy. Like Julie, he’s an English
teacher. He wrote his master’s thesis on E. M. Forster. He has long
eyelashes and intelligent brown eyes. When their daughter was
obsessed with Tangled, he perfected a “smolder” look, just like
Flynn Rider’s, and it worked as well on Julie as on Diana. He
always called the plumber or the contractor or whoever else
needed to be called and scheduled and met to keep the house
standing. And he loved Julie. He didn’t understand how they had
grown so far apart. All he knew is when he tried to help, he got
scolded. So he stopped trying.
After Julie’s poop episode, she sat down with him for a serious
talk, despite her dread of the ﬁght it could trigger.

[PDF page 140]

She explained the situation (one of the beneﬁts of a long-term
intimate relationship is you get to a point where you can talk
frankly about each other’s poop), and she asked for what she
needed: time.
He said, “Well, the house has to get cleaned. If we hired
cleaners, we’d have to organize stuﬀ before they come and I don’t
want the hassle. I can do it myself, if you’ll just let me do it and
not tell me how.”
Connection isn’t always warm and fuzzy. But Julie agreed.
He made Saturday cleaning day, and he turned it into a project
he shared wth their daughter. The ﬁrst Saturday afternoon Julie
came home from a physical therapy appointment to ﬁnd the house
tidy—not tidy like she would have made it, but tidy, and she
hadn’t had to do it herself—she almost cried. There was food in
the oven that she hadn’t had to cook. All the people she cared
about most were there for her. All she had to do to accept their
help was let go of her impulse to be in control and make
everything perfect.
Ha. “All.”
Sometimes connection is emotional support. Sometimes it’s
information and education, like the medical professionals helping
her relearn how to live in a body. And sometimes it’s cooking,
carpools, dishes, dusting, putting things back where they belong.
Public health theory calls it “instrumental support.”
To Julie, it just felt like “having a wife.”
G ood Connection Is G ood for You
People vary in their appetites for connection.12 Our variability is partly
explained by introversion or extroversion, partly by the pleasure an individual
experiences in socializing, and it also seems to be its own little quirk of
personality.13 Researchers can assess it as simply as asking a person whether
they agree or disagree with the statement “I have a strong need to belong.”14

[PDF page 141]

There is no “right amount” of needing to belong; there’s just the amount of
belonging that feels right for you.
Let’s talk about the health beneﬁts of getting the connection you need.
Caveat: Connection is emphatically not just about marriagey-type
relationships; it’s about having positive relationships of all kinds, including
friends, BFFLs, besties, buds, bros, and the fam. But spousal relationships
might be the most commonly studied, so those are the ones that provide the
most evidence of connection’s beneﬁts to our lives.
For example, a recent meta-analysis of more than seventy thousand
participants (all in heterosexual marriages) across a dozen nations found that
worse marital quality leads to worse physical health and shorter life, as well as
declining mental health.15 The standards for “quality” weren’t intimidatingly
high; they included “high self-reported satisfaction with the relationship,
predominantly positive attitudes toward one’s partner, and low levels of
hostile and negative behavior.” In short, “I’m satisﬁed with my relationship, I
like my partner, and we’re generally pretty supportive and nice to each other.”
But this baseline level of satisfaction can be powerful. Among people with
higher marital quality, injuries and wounds heal faster and chronic pain
interferes less with quality of life. In fact, relationship quality was found to be
a better predictor of health than smoking, and smoking is among the
strongest predictors of ill health. And the beneﬁts of a high-quality
relationship were sometimes even greater for women than for men.
Researchers found that this eﬀect is probably due, at least in part, to the
fact that people tend to take better care of themselves when they’re in a high-
quality relationship. In other words, our “self-care” is facilitated by the ways
we care for and are cared for by someone else.
A loved one doesn’t have to be your literal twin for it to happen to you. We
hope you have at least one person in your life so attuned to you that they quite
literally feel your pain, and stand with you inside it.
These energy-creating connections are what we call the “Bubble of Love.”

[PDF page 142]

The Bubble of Love
Social connections fuel your body just as eating nutritious foods and taking
deep breaths do.16 If Human Giver Syndrome is a virus, the Bubble of Love
is the environment that fuels your immune response. You might experience
connection in the Bubble with one person at a time—that’s Emily’s most
common experience. Or you might feel it most strongly in large, cooperative
groups—which has been Amelia’s experience. You might experience it best
with your best friends. Your spouse. Your church family. Your dog—yes, we
experience these kinds of connections with other species. Diﬀerent Bubbles
have diﬀerent styles; you don’t experience or express connection with your
roller derby teammates the same way you would with your family, and you
don’t experience or express connection with your family the same way you
would with your anti-capitalist, womynist knitting group—but all these
diﬀerent energy-creating Bubbles of Love share two speciﬁc ingredients: trust
and connected knowing.
Bubble Ingredient #1: Trust
Lots of species, including humans, keep track of who gives something to
another and who reciprocates. The belief that the people around us will
reciprocate in proportion to what we give them is called “trust.”
Researchers, particularly in economic science but also in psychology, use
the Trust Game as a tool for discovering the ways people respond to being
trusted or not, being betrayed or not. If you want to know more about that
science, just google “Trust Game.” They use money. We’re going to use
cupcakes. The experiments go like this:
Researchers put Emily and Amelia in a lab. They give Amelia four
cupcakes and a choice. She can take her cupcakes and go home, or she can
give Emily any number of the cupcakes she chooses. Any cupcake she
chooses to give Emily transforms into three cupcakes. So she can give away
one cupcake, and Emily will get three while Amelia still has three. She can
give away two, and Emily will have six while Amelia has two. And so on.

[PDF page 143]

And then if Emily gets any cupcakes, she, too, has a choice. She can
choose to return some to Amelia, or she can take her cupcakes and go home.
If Amelia trusts Emily, she gives away all four of her cupcakes, meaning a
dozen cupcakes for Emily! If Emily is trustworthy, she gives half back, and
they both get six! Trust followed by reciprocity results in maximum cupcakes
and a peaceable queendom.
In real life, the “cupcakes” we give and receive in relationships can be
almost anything—money, time, attention, actual cupcakes, or compassion for
our diﬃcult feelings. That last is the most important cupcake of all. If we turn
toward someone with our diﬃcult feelings—sadness, anger, hurt—and they
tune in to our feelings without judgment or defensiveness, it helps us to move
through that feeling, like a tunnel, to the light at the end.
This deﬁnition of trust can be boiled down to one question: “Are you there
for me?”17 Trustworthy people are there for each other, and that mutual trust
and trustworthiness maximizes wellness for both people.
But suppose Emily is having PMS cravings at the moment, and twelve
cupcakes look like dinner. She scarfs them down right there in the research
lab, then runs out the door, leaving Amelia alone with zero cupcakes and a
deep sense of betrayal.
This activates a stress response. Amelia may feel motivated, for example,
to seek revenge. In reality, revenge is neither the usual nor the most
productive response to betrayal. The most likely and valuable thing Amelia
will do after Emily’s betrayal is go home and complain to her husband that
Emily took all the cupcakes! A supportive guy, he bakes her a batch of her
own dozen cupcakes and invites some friends over, who all bring even more
cupcakes and agree that Emily is a PMSing jerk. Emerging from the
hormonal fog, eventually even Emily will agree, and she’ll show up at
Amelia’s house with even more cupcakes, apologize, and agree not to do that
again. In this way, trust is repaired and the Bubble is stabilized.18
However, if Emily says she’s sorry but she just can’t control her cupcake-
swiping urges, Amelia may forgive her, but she would be wise to put Emily
on the periphery of the Bubble.
Outside the energy-generating Bubble of Love, some jerk might say to
Amelia, “That’s what you get for giving away all your cupcakes.” But that’s

[PDF page 144]

why they’re outside the Bubble. People who don’t trust or are untrustworthy
are energy drains.
Let’s take a moment to explore the connection between trust and
“authenticity.”
Authenticity means “being totally yourself” and sharing the most intimate
parts of yourself, including the parts people might judge.19 Being authentic
requires trust, knowing that the person with whom you share these potentially
rejectable thoughts and feelings will not betray you. A lot of self-help books
(and, notably, a lot of books on marketing and sales) promote authenticity.
But strategic inauthenticity is part of trust, too.20 Sometimes you go to your
kid’s best friend’s birthday party even though your ex will also be there, and
you smile and make socially acceptable conversation, because that’s what you
want your kid to remember about the day. You don’t want her to remember
that time you threw her best friend’s birthday cake in your ex’s face while
screaming like a banshee.
Polite, socially acceptable suppression of our rage is “inauthentic,” insofar
as we are not sharing our full selves. And that is part of trust, too. Part of
being trustworthy is meeting expectations and staying in line, as if you were a
well-behaved woman.
Authenticity comes on the phone that evening, when you tell your best
friend how well you behaved, despite the desire to kick the table over and go
full Hulk. It comes when you cry as you say your kid will probably never
know how hard you had to work, that the whole point of all that hard work
was so that she would never need to know how hard you had to work.
And your best friend receives the cupcakes of your diﬃcult emotions and
returns them to you by saying, “But I know how hard you worked, and I am
proud of you. And what is your plan to purge all that rage your body is still
holding?”
When the people in our Bubble can turn with kindness and compassion
toward our diﬃcult emotions, and we can do the same for them, it strengthens
the Bubble like nothing else.

[PDF page 145]

Bubble Ingredient #2: Connected Know ing
Blythe McVicker Clinchy codiﬁed two divergent ways of knowing:
“separate knowing” and “connected knowing.”
In separate knowing, you separate an idea from its context and assess it in
terms of some externally imposed rules—rules that have proven to be
immensely powerful as a tool for scientiﬁc advancement. Still, it’s easy to
read her 1996 description of a “separate knower” and think, with our twenty-
ﬁrst-century social-media brains: “mansplainer”:
If you approach this chapter as a separate knower, you examine
its arguments with a critical eye, insisting that I justify every
point…looking for ﬂaws in my reasoning, considering how I might
be misinterpreting the evidence I present, what alternative
interpretations could be made, and whether I might be omitting
evidence that would contradict my position.21
And immediately, she points out the crucial strength of separate knowing:
The standards you apply in evaluating my arguments are objective
and impersonal; they have been agreed upon and codiﬁed by
logicians and scientists.
There’s a reason your entire formal education was likely devoted to training
you in separate knowing. Separate knowing winnows the wheat from the
chaﬀ.
Connected knowing, in contrast, involves coming to understand an idea by
exploring it within its context. You put yourself in the shoes of the other
person, to try on their point of view. You suspend (temporarily) your doubts,
judgments, criticisms, and personal needs, in favor of exploring their
perspective—not because you accept it, but because you want to understand.
Then you bring in elements of your own life experience or personality,
holding these up to the other point of view, testing it and turning it and
testing it again, exploring what it would be like to have this person’s

[PDF page 146]

perspective, within your own point of view. Sometimes we experience the
process of connected knowing as a morphing or reshaping of ourselves into
the form that ﬁts the other person—like trying on someone else’s clothes. In
the process, you feel how comfortable (or uncomfortable) it would be for you
to have the same perspective.
It’s called “connected knowing” because it doesn’t separate an idea from its
context; it insists that we can only understand something if we also
understand how it relates to the context it comes from. If separate knowing
separates wheat from chaﬀ, connected knowing explores the relationship
between the wheat and the chaﬀ, seeking to understand where each comes
from and why they accompany each other.
Though everyone uses both, women are more likely to use connected
knowing than separate knowing, and the opposite is true for men.22
Perhaps because of this diﬀerence, connected knowing is often dismissed
as “irrational,” as if the only alternative to the scientiﬁc method and logical
reasoning is nonsense. It’s not. Connected knowing is careful, eﬀortful, often
slow, and intensely rational, meaning it follows predictable patterns and
progression. It integrates emotion into the information needed to understand
an idea. It’s also imaginative, requiring the listener to suspend their emotional
reactions to diﬀerences and allow themselves to try on a viewpoint distinct
from their own.
But the most energy-cresting characteristic of connected knowing is that it
isn’t just a way to connect with and understand others; it’s a way to connect
with and understand our own internal experience and develop our own
identities, through connection with others.
Women, more so than men, build our identities within the context of our
relationships. We don’t know why this diﬀerence exists—Are we born that
way? Do we learn it from our culture? Who knows?—but for our purposes, it
doesn’t matter why. What matters is that connected knowing fosters both
healthy relationships and healthy individual identity. Connected knowing is
why women often ﬁnd profound satisfaction in understanding themselves and
their identity in terms of their relationships—sister, daughter, mother, friend.
Of course, insisting that women can only develop their identities within
relationships is just another way of imposing gendered rules that limit

[PDF page 147]

women’s access to other sources of growth, as well as to basic autonomy. But
if we insist women “should” develop their identities within the pursuit of
“achievement” rather than through relationships, we’re pathologizing women’s
(and every human’s) innate search for themselves through connection.
Knowing yourself better by learning about others is healthy. Neither is right
or wrong, good or bad, and people vary in the degree to which they practice
both ways of knowing. Again (and again), we need both; we need the
freedom to move into and out of connection.
The blend of connected and separate knowing is “constructed knowing.”
This book is, by necessity, a product of constructed knowing, integrating
separate and connected knowing into a textured whole. Emily and Amelia
can try to learn and explain everything science has to say about the brain’s
and body’s responses to stress—separate knowing—but we can never know
what it feels like to be you, nor can we predict what’s going to be eﬀective in
your life for dealing with the stress. Only you are the expert in you, so we’ve
included stories and experiences from as many sources as possible, hoping
you’ll try them on as you read, see how they ﬁt, and consider how you may
accept or reject any given idea—connected knowing. Between the three of us
—Emily, Amelia, and you, reader—we’ll ﬁnd our way to a plan that will
work for you, even if it wouldn’t work for anyone else.
Signs You N eed to Recharge in the Bubble of Love
In chapter 1, we described four signs that you need to stop dealing with your
stressors and just deal with the stress itself. Here we’ll describe four signs that
you have to disengage from your autonomous eﬀorts and seek connection.
Each of these emotions is a diﬀerent form of hunger for connection—that is,
they’re all diﬀerent ways of feeling lonely:
When you have been gaslit. When you’re asking yourself, “Am I crazy, or is
there something completely unacceptable happening right now?” turn to
someone who can relate; let them give you the reality check that yes, the
gaslights are ﬂickering.
When you feel “not enough.” No individual can meet all the needs of the
world. Humans are not built to do big things alone. We are built to do them

[PDF page 148]

together. When you experience the empty-handed feeling that you are just
one person, unable to meet all the demands the world makes on you, helpless
in the face of the endless, yawning need you see around you, recognize that
emotion for what it is: a form of loneliness. Find your people. Call your
friends and commiserate; consume all the YOU GO, GIRL! social media memes
you like; watch Wonder Woman or Hidden Figures or Moana or whatever
immerses you in a story of women working with a team of men, a team of
women, or nature and the divine itself.
When you’re sad. In the animated ﬁlm Inside Out, the emotions in the head
of a tween girl, Riley, struggle to cope with the exigencies of growing up.
Joy, the emotions’ leader, tries to contain Sadness, to keep her from getting in
the way. Joy literally draws a circle on the ﬂoor and tells Sadness to stay
inside the circle. That’s the way many of us have been taught to treat our
sadness: keep it under control, because it makes others uncomfortable.
(Because, again: human givers.)
But at the critical turning point, when Joy is in a pit of despair, on the
verge of giving up all hope, she remembers the day Riley missed the winning
shot of her hockey game. On the verge of quitting, Riley sat alone, until her
parents came to talk to her. They led her to her team, who embraced her.
“Sadness,” Joy whispers in revelation. “Mom and Dad…the team…They
came to help because of Sadness.”
Sadness is the beacon; it is the Bat-Signal. Though many of us were taught
that we should mask our uncomfortable emotions, the truth about sadness is
that we ﬁnd our way out of that tunnel most eﬃciently when we have a friend
who calls through the darkness, “I’m right here!” or better yet, someone who
can take our hand in the dark and say, “Any step we take together is a step
toward the light.”
When you are boiling with rage. Rage has a special place in women’s lives
and a special role in the Bubble of Love. More, even, than sadness, many of
us have been taught to swallow our rage, hide it even from ourselves. We
have been taught to fear rage—our own, as well as others’—because its power
can be used as a weapon. Can be. A chef’s knife can be used as a weapon.
And it can help you prepare a feast. It’s all in how you use it. We don’t want
to hurt anyone, and rage is indeed very, very powerful.

[PDF page 149]

Bring your rage into the Bubble with your loved ones’ permission, and
complete the stress response cycle with them. If your Bubble is a rugby team,
you can leverage your rage in a match or practice. If your Bubble is a knitting
circle, you might need to get creative. Use your body. Jump up and down, get
noisy, release all that energy, share it with others.
“Yes!” say the people in your Bubble. “That was some bullshit you dealt
with!”
Rage gives you strength and energy and the urge to ﬁght, and sharing that
energy in the Bubble changes it from something potentially dangerous to
something safe and potentially transformative.
ÜBER-BU BBLE
For eight years, Emily worked as the health educator at Smith
College, a campus crowded with Lisa Simpsons: highly
intelligent, high-achieving women, who are also intensely
driven, ambitious, hard-working, sensitive, and social justice–
minded. M any struggle with anxiety, depression, disordered
eating, or self-harm. And Emily was their health educator.
In 2014, she gave a talk titled “Love Is an Open Door: Frozen
and the Science of ‘the Feels,’ ” in which she explained the
science of emotion, as illustrated by that year’s Disney
blockbuster, Frozen.
Emily asked A melia’s musical advice. “Should I play
recordings from the movie? W ould it be better to ask a music
professor if she has students who could perform the songs
live?”
“M ake it a sing-along,” A melia said. “Let them do the
singing.”
She did, and it turned out to be the highlight of Emily’s time
at Smith.

[PDF page 150]

Three hundred students attended on a Friday evening in
September. Half an hour in, right at the midpoint of the talk,
Emily played the video of “Let It G o,” complete with lyrics at
the bottom of the screen.
Hundreds of driven, brilliant, perfectionistic women belted
out, “That perfect girl is gone!” The sound lled the entire
Campus Center. You could hear it on the lawn outside. It was
breathtaking. Emily looked at the sea of upturned faces, lit by
the larger-than-life video of Queen Elsa fully expressing her
power for the rst time in her life, and thought, How do we get
them to do this every day? A fter that talk, students approached
Emily in tears, telling her that was exactly what they needed—
and nobody was saying the science part of the talk was what
they needed. It was the singing.
This is what we call Über-Bubble, and you make it with
rhythmic play, including music-making. It happens to singers in a
choir, players on a team, voters on election night amid a group
of likeminded supporters, or even moviegoers in a crowd of
strangers who share enthusiasm for Black Panther. In these
activities, through synchronous rhythmic movement, through
song, through play, through intense eﬀort to achieve a shared
goal, for a few moments we step onto a neurological bridge,
and the barrier between us and other people dissolves—
sometimes a lot, sometimes just a little—and we experience
our own identity as something that extends beyond our skin,
into the intangible “U s.” Über-Bubble.
Über-Bubble doesn’t just feel good; it actively increases
cooperation within a group.23 Laurel Trainor at the M cM aster
Institute of M usic and the M ind has demonstrated that toddlers
who experience synchronous bouncing with another person
are much more likely to help that person when she drops a
pencil a few minutes later than babies who are bounced
asynchronously with that person.24 A dults who tap their ngers
in time with a stranger are three times more likely to volunteer

[PDF page 151]

to help that person with a math and logic questionnaire than if
they tap asynchronously.25
The pleasure of synchronized movement is built into our
biology, and it’s a powerful tool to access your greatest well-
being.
When we share trust, authenticity, and connected knowing with
someone, we change, and it’s scary and good and important. We
come to know certain people, the right people, as intimately as we
know ourselves, and, in coming to know them, we come to know
ourselves in new and deeper ways. Sophie’s butterﬂies knew that
Bernard was one of those people.
But because Bernard was not what she was looking for, Sophie
declined his invitations to dinner and movies and various other
date-like activities. She became friends with him, though, almost
against her will. He was funny and smart and warmhearted and
a great dad, and he listened to her in a way that made her know
herself better.
“It’s extremely inconvenient!” Sophie said to Emily.
“Positive reappraisal!” Emily answered. “When it’s inconvenient,
it’s probably doing the most for you.”
We don’t need other people’s love in order to love ourselves; we
don’t need a romantic partner to be “complete.” But we need other
people to teach us how to love ourselves best.
At last, Sophie let herself dive in, and her world transformed.
She said, “I thought love would just be like being me, plus knowing
that if I’m bleeding to death somebody will call an ambulance. But
it’s more than that. I see myself in his eyes, and I ﬁnd new ways to
know and love myself, at the same time that I ﬁnd new ways to
know and love him, and then I know and love us and what we are
together, which is this thing beyond what either of us is.”

[PDF page 152]

Then she started using phrases like “emergent properties of
complex dynamical systems,” and Emily nodded in excitement,
and from there it got technical.
The point is connection is good for us. It is not weakness; it
doesn’t mean we’re “needy.” It makes us stronger.
We saw in chapter 1 that positive social interaction and aﬀection complete
the cycle. Here in chapter 6, we’re declaring connection to be as primary a
source of strength as any basic biological need.
In the next chapter, we’ll talk about an equally important source of
strength: rest.
tl;dr:
•Connection—with friends, family, pets, the divine, etc.—is
as necessary as food and water. Humans are not built to
function autonomously; we are built to oscillate between
connection and autonomy and back again.
•We are all constantly “co-regulating” one another without
even being aware it’s happening—synchronizing heartbeats,
changing moods, and helping one another feel seen and
heard.
•Certain kinds of connection create energy. When you share
mutual trust and “connected knowing” with someone, you
co-create energy that renews both people. We call this the
“Bubble of Love.”
•Sadness, rage, and the feeling that you are not “enough” are
forms of loneliness. When you experience these emotions,
connect.

[PDF page 153]

7
W HAT M AK ES YOU  STRONG ER
Julie was still tired, but bowel retraining meant that she ﬁnally
accepted help. Lots of it. Help she had needed for years but had
been too, maybe, proud, to ask for? Whatever the reason, she had
held on to the idea that she was supposed to do all of it herself…
right up until the moment when “all of it” broke her body.
So now she was making like Queen Elsa and letting it go.
Vindication, of a kind, and deeper insight, came when Jeremy
volunteered to take on Diana Duty when his school was on spring
break but neither Diana’s nor Julie’s schools were.
He learned a lot about his daughter that week. He discovered
that she had unshakable opinions about what she should wear,
and they were not always ideas that conformed to Jeremy’s
standards or, indeed, to the school dress code. Jeremy had not
known about the dress code until the school called to tell him to
bring clothes for his daughter to change into. Diana also had
opinions about what she ate, and they were not opinions that
conformed to any nutritional guidelines of which Jeremy was
aware. Vegetables? No. Fruit? Only in the form of a roll-up or
gummy, please. He cooked, and she wouldn’t eat, and they
argued, and he felt like an asshole, his stomach churning from
anger and frustration and worry.
And the time it took! The shuttling to and from lessons, the
negotiations, the monitoring to make sure everything got done that

[PDF page 154]

needed to get done, the repetition, the repetition, God help him, the
repetition.
But more than the time, the emotional drain! The enforced
patience, the reasoning and instruction, the constant management
of his own frustration, trying to be the loving, happy, patient
father he wanted to be, while counting the hours until spring break
was over.
At the end of the week, he sat at the kitchen table, one palm on
his forehead, as he described the week. He looked up at Julie for
some sympathy and found her smiling at him, relaxed and
amused. It distracted him from his tirade.
“You look better. I mean, you look good.”
Julie raised her eyebrow at him.
“I just mean you look not bothered.”
Julie acknowledged his point. “That’s true. A lot of times, I
haven’t been able to handle your stuﬀ when I was all stressed out,
and then you were unloading your stress on me, too.” She sent her
attention to her body, tuning in to what it was experiencing at that
moment, and said, “At this moment, I feel like I can handle it.”
This chapter is about where Julie got that strength.
—
Nietzsche (ugh) told us, “What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.”
You’ve been hearing this for years, in one form or another, but let’s be
speciﬁc. Like, if you’re hit by a car and don’t die, does the car make you
stronger? No. Does injury or disease make you stronger? No. Does suﬀering
alone build character? No. These things leave you more vulnerable to further
injury.
What makes you stronger is whatever happens to you after you survive the
thing that didn’t kill you.
What makes you stronger is rest.

[PDF page 155]

Rest is, quite simply, when you stop using a part of you that’s used up,
worn out, damaged, or inﬂamed, so that it has a chance to renew itself. And
it’s the topic of this chapter.
“Rest” doesn’t just mean sleep—though of course sleep is essential. Rest
also includes switching from one type of activity to another. Mental energy,
like stress, has a cycle it runs through, an oscillation from task focus to
processing and back to task focus. The idea that you can use “grit” or “self-
control” to stay focused and productive every minute of every day is not
merely incorrect, it is gaslighting, and it is potentially damaging your brain.
Let’s take a moment to wrap our brains around this strange reality: Life in
the modern developed world is such that many of us have a vast
overabundance of virtually everything…yet often we can’t meet our basic,
life-sustaining, physiological needs without feeling guilty, ashamed, lazy,
greedy, conﬂicted, or, at best, deﬁant. An Internet meme we like goes, “You
don’t have to set yourself on ﬁre to keep other people warm.” But according
to Human Giver Syndrome, you deﬁnitely should. As “human givers,” women
live with the expectation that we give every part of our humanity, including
our bodies, our health, and our very lives. Our time, energy, and attention
should go toward someone else’s well-being, not be squandered on our own.
What’s the matter with you, you lazy, selﬁsh monster, sleeping seven hours a
night? Get back in line, with the rest of us exhausted, righteous givers.
Toward the end of this chapter, you’ll read our science-based conclusion
about just how much rest it takes for you to survive and grow stronger, and
you may scoﬀ and say, “I don’t have time for that!” or “That’s too extreme!”
and maybe that’s true….But maybe that’s just what Human Giver Syndrome
wants you to believe. Maybe, to get enough rest to keep yourself fully
functional, you’re going to have to choose your own well-being—your own
life—over the demands of Human Giver Syndrome.
As Audre Lorde put it, “Caring for myself is not self-indulgence, it is self-
preservation, and that is an act of political warfare.” This chapter is about
arming you for that battle—a battle that is quite literally a ﬁght for your life.
We oﬀer the best available scientiﬁc evidence to help you build a practice of
sustainable living, to protect you from the toxic cultural narrative of self-
destruction as virtue.
So curl up someplace cozy, and let’s talk about rest.

[PDF page 156]

Default M ode—aka Daydreaming
We are built to oscillate between work and rest. When we allow for this
oscillation, the quality of our work improves, along with our health.
To illustrate: In one study, a group of research participants were asked to
write down whatever thoughts they had, but were explicitly told they should
try not to write about a white bear. This was eﬀortful enough to deplete some
mental energy. Then half the participants were instructed to relax as much as
they could between tasks—the researchers even played a Satie piano piece to
reinforce the idea that they should be relaxing—while the other half were
given no instructions and just sat there waiting for the next task. Result? The
group that relaxed persisted twice as long at the next depleting task (a set of
three-digit multiplication problems) than the group that simply waited.1
Conclusion: Rest makes us more persistent and productive.
How?
A growing body of research has established that we do our best at any
given task for only a limited amount of time, energy, or attention, then our
performance drops oﬀ, our attention wanders, and our motivation
evaporates.2
But resting after a depleting activity eliminates the eﬀects of fatigue.3
When you drop out of task-focused attention and into neutral, your
“resting” brain is not doing nothing—far from it. In fact, there’s very little
diﬀerence in the amount of energy used by your brain when you’re in the
middle of doing your taxes and when you’re standing at the counter, mind
wandering while you wait to be handed your takeout order.4
Running in the background of your awareness is what neuroscientists call
the “default mode network,” a collection of linked brain areas that function as
a kind of low-grade dreaming when your attention is not focused on a task.5
When your mind is “wandering,” your default mode network is online. It
assesses your present state and it plans for the future, a little like a chess-
playing computer, rapidly scanning the board and running simulations to see
what would happen if you made a particular move. And it’s doing it without
active intervention from you.

[PDF page 157]

Life coach extraordinaire Martha Beck ﬁgured this out without the science.
When her team is struggling at the oﬃce, the solution is to stop working, turn
oﬀ their computers, and go play or rest. Where so many others would “dig
in,” set up a command central and not stop until a solution was found, she
asks her team to take a break.
“It works every time,” Beck told Bloomberg Businessweek.6 “I don’t know
why, but it does, so I guess I don’t really need to know.”
The default mode network is why. (Also, some team members are
probably completing their stress response cycles during the breaks, which
allows them to be more creative and curious.)
Research on this network is very new and lots of questions remain
unanswered about exactly what it does and how it works, but it’s increasingly
clear that the more balanced the linkages between the diﬀerent domains of
the default mode network are, and the more ﬂuidly a person can toggle from
default to attentive, the more creative, socially skilled, and happy a person is
likely to be.7
Mental rest is not idleness; it is the time necessary for your brain to process
the world.8 So, for example, while writing this book, Emily would write for
an hour or two, then go put in a load of laundry or dishes. Write for another
hour or two and then empty the dishwasher or rotate the laundry. In the same
way the laundry was running while Emily wrote, her default mode was
running while she folded towels. The default mode network didn’t need her
help—in fact, it needed her to stop writing, so that it could work on the
puzzle she had given it, without her looking over its shoulder. Then when she
came back to work, her default mode would hand her new insight. If she had
stayed chained to her desk, insisting that she couldn’t move until she had
reached a certain word count, she may have written more words, but they
would have been lower-quality words.
And sometimes Emily wasn’t folding laundry like a good little housewife,
she was playing a game on her phone, and that was ﬁne, too, because what
her brain needed was any low-demand task that allowed her default mode to
come online.
Walking away from a task or a problem doesn’t mean you’re “quitting” or
giving up. It means you’re recruiting all your brain’s processes for a particular

[PDF page 158]

task—including the capabilities that don’t involve your eﬀortful attention.
Not everyone slips comfortably into default mode. This has been tested
empirically in a series of fairly hilarious studies:9
Researchers ﬁrst asked participants to experience a mild electrical shock,
along with various other pleasant or unpleasant stimuli.
“Would you pay ﬁve dollars never to have to feel that shock again?” the
researchers asked.
“Hellz yes,” the participant would say.
Then they took the participant into a quiet room that contained the electric
shock device, and left them alone, with instructions to “entertain themselves
with their thoughts” for ﬁfteen minutes.
“The shock machine is here. You can touch it or not, it’s up to you,” they
told the participant who had just said they’d pay money not to feel that shock
again.
In fact, a quarter of the women and two-thirds of the men gave themselves
an electric shock rather than simply sit there and “just think.” On average,
they self-administered one or two shocks over the ﬁfteen minutes.
Instead of being in default mode, research suggests these self-zapping
participants were bored. Boredom is the discomfort you experience when
your brain is in active-attention mode, but can’t latch on to anything to attend
to.10 They were zapping themselves in desperation for something, anything,
to pay attention to, even if it was uncomfortable.
Fortunately, there is active rest.
Active Rest
Everybody knows a muscle that isn’t used will atrophy. We all know a muscle
that is worked constantly, without rest, will grow fatigued and eventually fail
in exhaustion. And we all know a muscle that gets worked and rested and
worked and rested will grow stronger.
But suppose you break your right leg, and while it’s healing in a cast, you
exercise your left leg. The signal from the left leg travels up the spine and

[PDF page 159]

crosses from one side to the other, sparking growth in the right leg—not as
much as in the left, but enough to prevent some of the atrophy of disuse.11
This is the original meaning of “cross-training”—literally, training across the
spine.
But look, it’s even bigger than that: When you work your muscles—
especially your biggest muscles—you strengthen not just the muscles you’re
using but also your lungs and liver and brain. Exercising one part of you
strengthens all of you; exercising the strongest parts of you strengthens the
rest of you most eﬃciently. The same goes for cognitive, emotional, and
social eﬀort.
This is active rest: working one gear while resting the others.
So for example, sometimes the “rest” Emily’s brain needed was not a low-
demand task like laundry or YouTube, but a diﬀerent kind of writing. Result:
She wrote a novel at the same time as writing this book. Amelia worked full-
time as a professor of music and conducted a children’s choir, while writing
the book. Most women are at least this productive—they rest certain gears
while they work others, and this “active rest” makes us better at all the things
we do.
People vary, including in what rest looks like for them.
But one universal need is sleep.
W hy Sleep?
Sleep is really strange. How can it make sense that we lay our bodies down
and lose awareness of the outside world for hours at a time, while who knows
what lions and hippos and other threats may be lurking? During certain
phases of sleep, our motor functioning is locked oﬀ, so that our bodies can’t
respond to our brain’s activation. There we lie, in the dark, paralyzed,
unresponsive, and limp to the bone, as our eyeballs ticktock behind our
closed lids and our attention is funneled away from the outside world toward
an intense, multisensory hallucination—a dream—that feels both real and
urgent in the moment but will be forgotten by the waking mind within
seconds of rousing.

[PDF page 160]

Humans are designed to spend a third of their lives in this most vulnerable
state—eight hours a day, every single day.
How can it make sense?
It turns out that the physiological, cognitive, emotional, and social beneﬁts
of spending a third of our lives unconscious outweigh even the costs in time,
opportunity to do other things, and inattention to threats. Our whole body,
including our brain, is working hard as we sleep, to accomplish life-
preserving tasks that can be best achieved when we’re not around to interfere.
Quite simply, we are not complete without sleep.
Physical activity is not complete without sleep. While you sleep, your
bones, blood vessels, digestive system, muscles (including your heart), and all
your other body tissues heal from the damage you inﬂicted on them during
the day. If you engaged in physical activity, your body will repair itself and
grow stronger while you sleep. Physical activity without sleep, by contrast,
leaves you more vulnerable to injury and illness than you would have been
without the activity. If you’re not going to sleep, better not exercise.
Learning is not complete without sleep. Your memories consolidate and
new information is integrated into existing knowledge. Studying for a test,
memorizing a speech, or learning a language? Review right before bed, then
sleep for seven to nine hours. Your brain will soak up the information like
grass absorbing rain after a drought. Any motor skills you practiced—skiing
or playing piano or walking up the stairs—get integrated, so that you’re better
at them the next day. The beneﬁts of practice come not during the practice
itself but during sleep; without it, your skill will actually decline, no matter
how much you practice. If you’re not going to sleep, you’re studying and
practicing for nothing.
Emotions are not complete without sleep. You can dream about beating
the daylights out of your enemy, and you’ll wake up feeling released from the
grip of your rage, better able to handle interpersonal conﬂict. In one study,
professionals who got inadequate sleep were rated by their peers and their
employees as having lower emotional intelligence.12 Marital satisfaction, too,
is linked to sleep quality.13 Recent lack of sleep not only worsens conﬂict
between spouses, it also heightens each person’s inﬂammatory immune
response to conﬂict, a biological marker paralleling each partner’s heightened

[PDF page 161]

reactivity to their spouse’s complaint.14 If you’re not getting adequate sleep,
better avoid talking to other humans.
Did we say this yet? Sleep is important.
We are built to oscillate between wakefulness and sleep, because we
require the things our brain does on its own during sleep to make us fully
functional while we’re awake.
And at its most extreme, sleep deprivation is a form of torture.15 You can
quite literally die of sleep deprivation—by physiological deprivation akin to
starvation.16 When researchers deprive rats of sleep for two weeks, the rats’
immune systems become so impaired their blood becomes infected with their
own gut bacteria and they die of septicemia.
“When you are broken, go to bed,” goes the French proverb. You are not
complete without sleep.
And what are the costs of inadequate sleep?
Inadequate sleep damages your physical health: chronic sleep deprivation
—short sleep and disturbed sleep—is a causal factor in 20 percent of serious
car accidents,17 and in every common cause of death, including heart disease,
cancer, diabetes, hypertension, Alzheimer’s, and immune dysfunction,
increasing risk by up to 45 percent.18 Poor sleep is a better predictor of
developing type 2 diabetes than lack of physical activity, but when was the
last time anyone told you to get enough sleep to prevent diabetes?19
Inadequate sleep impairs brain functioning, including working memory
and long-term memory, attention, decision-making, hand-eye coordination,
calculation accuracy, logical reasoning, and creativity.20 People who’ve been
awake for nineteen hours (say, woke up at 7 A.M. and now it’s 2 A.M.) are as
impaired in their cognitive and motor functioning as a person who is legally
intoxicated.21 People who’ve slept just four hours the previous night are
similarly impaired, as are those who’ve slept six or fewer hours every night
for the last two weeks. Anything you wouldn’t do drunk—drive, lead a work
meeting, raise a child—don’t try it if you’ve been awake for nineteen hours,
slept only four hours the previous night, or slept fewer than six hours every
night for two weeks.

[PDF page 162]

Your social life is also aﬀected by lack of sleep: team communication in
the workplace and group decision-making are impaired, while hostility and
even unethical workplace behavior increase.22 Your emotional life is
impacted, too: depression and sleep diﬃculties are closely intertwined, each
exacerbating the other,23 and insomnia predicts suicidal thoughts, even in
people without depression.24 Anxiety and sleep, too, are closely related and
mutually causal.25 If you struggle with depression, anxiety, or other mental
health issues—which more than twice as many women as men do (a
conservative estimate is about one in ﬁve women in their lifetime26)—sleep is
medicine for you.
This is not an area of research where there’s any reasonable debate; the
medical opinion is in: Sleep is good for you, and not sleeping is bad for you in
every way—dangerous and potentially lethal. Three recent meta-analyses,
comprising millions of research participants, found overall around a 12
percent greater risk of all-cause mortality among those who slept fewer than
ﬁve or six hours a night.27 If you make only one change in your life after
reading this book, let it be getting more sleep.
CAN YOU  G ET “TOO M U CH” SLEEP?
“But naps make me feel worse!” you may say.
W hen we’re sleep deprived, our bodies try to compensate
by activating the stress response—doses of adrenaline and
cortisol to help us survive the temporary stressor of too little
sleep—which masks the fatigue and impairment. The result is
that sleep deprivation can act a little like alcohol; just as a
person who has been drinking may be too impaired to know
how impaired they are (“I’m ne, gimme the keys!”), a person
who isn’t rested may be too sleep deprived to be aware of
how sleep deprived they are.
The counterintuitive result is that when we eventually sleep,
the stress response reduces, so when we’re actually better

[PDF page 163]

rested, we may feel less rested. Adrenaline is no longer masking
our fatigue. And we groan, “U gh, I slept too much,” the way
we’d groan after a huge meal, “U gh, I ate too much.”
Can you actually sleep “too much”?
The general rule is: If you’re sleeping more than nine hours
out of every twenty-four, and you still don’t feel rested, that
could be a sign of an underlying issue, and it would be good to
talk with a medical provider.28
One day Emily said this to a group of students and one
raised her hand and said, “But I’ve been sleeping, like, ten hours
a night and I’m exhausted.” Lots of people in the group had an
opinion about what might be causing her exhaustion—
everything from depression to narcolepsy to laziness—but
Emily said, “If you’re sleeping more than nine hours every night
and don’t feel rested, what do you do?”
“Talk to a doctor?” the student parroted back.
“Right.”
Six months later, that student approached Emily and said,
“Hey, you probably don’t remember, but I’m the one who was
sleeping ten—”
“Oh, I remember,” Emily said.
“W ell, I actually did go to the doctor and I did a sleep study,
and it turned out I had really severe sleep apnea. Over the
summer I had my tonsils and adenoids removed and now I
sleep with a mask, and it has completely changed my life. I had
no idea how sleep-deprived I was my whole life.”
Bottom line: If you’re sleeping more than nine hours a day
and don’t feel rested, talk to a medical provider.29 And if you’re
thinking, “But Emily and Amelia, I’m trying. I give myself an
eight-hour window of opportunity to sleep and the sleep
doesn’t happen! I literally can’t get the sleep I need,” talk to a
medical provider. Do a sleep study. It could change your life.
M aybe even save it.

[PDF page 164]

An “Invisible W orkplace”
Sleep is a miracle. What else but sleep can mend a broken bone and a broken
heart? What else but sleep leads us to a lost memory and to a new idea? What
else but sleep can transform the damage done to our bodies, whether by a
nice, long run or by trauma, into even greater strength?
Yet moral judgment about sleep is built into the cultural history of the
West. Medieval theologians believed humans’ need for sleep was “a divine
punishment for the fall of man and a daily reminder to mankind of their
sinfulness, weakness and imperfection.”30 America’s puritanical forebears
warned (incorrectly) that “immoderate sleep” could cause everything from
seizures to infertility to poverty.31 By the 1830s, medical journals were
saying that more than four hours of sleep was “an intemperance.”32 Sloth.
The immorality of adequate sleep has changed somewhat over the last ﬁfty
years. These days, the message is not so much that we don’t need sleep, but
that if a person has time to sleep, they’re doing something wrong; they’re not
working hard enough. We’ve made a virtue of being exhausted, of denying
ourselves rest. This idea is so embedded in the culture that Emily has lost
count of the number of women who tell her they feel guilty about sleeping.
Guilty. About sleeping.
“How come?” Emily asked one group. “You may as well feel guilty about
breathing! It’s necessary. So why the guilt over sleep?”
“It’s selﬁsh,” a woman answered. “When you’re asleep, you’re only helping
yourself.”
That woman was eighteen years old, and already a committed human giver.
As we’ve seen, sleep is essential not only for your own personal health, but
also for your emotional health and relationships, so it’s not even remotely
“selﬁsh.” But the lesson here is: Human Giver Syndrome messes with
women’s sleep.
So no wonder sleep problems are more common in women than men,
especially around menopause.33 As researchers write, women’s sleep is “an
‘invisible workplace’ in which they remain on duty throughout the night,
available to provide the physical and emotional support needed to ensure the

[PDF page 165]

well-being of their family.” And it’s not limited to the inevitable insomnia-
fest that is caring for a newborn, during which, of course, mothers in
heterosexual couples are much more likely than fathers to interrupt their
sleep to care for a child; this persists through the preschool years, regardless
of which partner has a full-time job.34 As human givers, women are expected
to sacriﬁce their sleep for the beneﬁt of others. So we deprive ourselves of a
basic physiological need—not a lot, necessarily, but every day, over and over
—and the accumulating deprivation wears us down, day by day, until there’s
too little left to do all the other things life expects of us.
It’s not just cultural messages that make accessing sleep and rest diﬃcult.
Suppose you deal with all your stressors, you check all the boxes on your to-
do list, and give yourself permission and opportunity to rest. If you’ve dealt
with the stressors but haven’t dealt with the stress itself, your brain won’t let
you rest. It will constantly scan for the lion that’s about to come after you, so
when you try to go to sleep, your brain won’t let you fall asleep, or it will
wake you up over and over, checking for that lion. Complete the cycle, so
your brain can transition into rest.
Forty-Two Percent
So how much rest is “adequate”?
Science says: 42 percent.
That’s the percentage of time your body and brain need you to spend
resting. It’s about ten hours out of every twenty-four. It doesn’t have to be
every day; it can average out over a week or a month or more. But yeah. That
much.
“That’s ridiculous! I don’t have that kind of time!” you might protest—and
we remind you that we predicted you might feel that way, back at the start of
the chapter.
We’re not saying you should take 42 percent of your time to rest; we’re
saying if you don’t take the 42 percent, the 42 percent will take you. It will
grab you by the face, shove you to the ground, put its foot on your chest, and
declare itself the victor.

[PDF page 166]

Have you ever come down with a terrible cold as soon as you ﬁnished a
huge project? Have you found yourself sleeping twelve or fourteen hours
every day for the ﬁrst three days of vacation? Have you, like Amelia, literally
ended up in the hospital after a prolonged period of extreme stress? We’ve
established by now that stress is a physiological phenomenon that impacts
every system and function in our bodies, including immune functioning,
digestive functioning, and hormones. To keep all of those systems in full
working order, our biology requires that we spend 42 percent of our lives
maintaining the organism of our physical existence.
Here’s what your 42 percent might look like:
•Eight hours of sleep opportunity, give or take an hour.
•Twenty to thirty minutes of “stress-reducing conversation”
with your partner or other trusted loved one.
•Thirty minutes of physical activity. Whether with people or
alone, you do it with the explicit mindset of gear-switching,
Feels-purging, rest-getting freedom. Physical activity counts

[PDF page 167]

as “rest” partly because it improves the quality of your sleep
and partly because it completes the stress response cycle,
transitioning your body out of a stressed state and into a
resting state.
•Thirty minutes of paying attention to food. “Thirty
minutes?” you say. Don’t fret. That includes all meals,
shopping, cooking, and eating, and it doesn’t have to be all
at once. It can be with people or alone, but it can’t be while
working or driving or watching TV or even listening to a
podcast. Pay attention to your food for half an hour a day.
This counts as rest partly because it provides necessary
nourishment and partly because it’s active rest, a change of
pace, apart from the other domains of your life. Think of it
as meditation.
•And a thirty-minute wild card, depending on your needs. For
some people, this will be extra physical activity, because they
need that much to feel good. For others, it will be preparation
for their sleep opportunity, because they know their brains
need time to transition from the buzzing state of wakefulness
into the quiet that allows the brain to sleep. For still others, it
will be social play time, because their appetite for social
engagement is strong. And for some, it’s simply a buﬀer for
travel and changing clothes and other rest-preparation time
(because: reality) during which you engage your default mode
network—that is, you let your mind wander.
These are just averages, and as you can see, you’ll sometimes do more than
one thing at a time. Some people need more sleep than others—sleep need is
estimated to be about 40 percent genetically heritable, so even identical twins
can vary a lot.35 Emily needs seven and a half hours, but Amelia needs nine,
and if she only gets eight, she really feels it. Natural exercisers may want to
spend more time on physical activity. Foodies may want to spend more time
on food. Extroverts may want to spend as much of this time as possible with
other people. Your mileage may vary; ﬁne-tune it to ﬁt your individual needs.

[PDF page 168]

If you’re thinking, I can get by with less, you’re right. You can “get by,”
dragging your increasingly rest-deprived brain and body through your life.
And there are periods in your life when adequate rest will not be an option.
Newborn baby? No sleep for you. Elderly dog? You’ll be up every four hours.
Working three jobs while ﬁnishing your degree? Get by on ﬁve hours of
sleep.
But no one who cares about your well-being will expect you to sustain that
way of life for an extended period of time. No one in your Bubble of Love
wants you to “get by”; they want you to thrive and grow stronger. We want
you to thrive and grow stronger. What makes you stronger is rest.
Suppose you send your ten-year-old child away to camp and you learn they
aren’t feeding her adequately because they’re sure she can “get by” on less.
Suppose you leave your dog with a pet-sitter and learn they’re having your
dog sleep outside in the cold because he can “get by” in that weather.
Suppose your best friend starts wearing a tight-laced corset everywhere, so
that she physically can’t take a full breath and is constantly slightly oxygen-
deprived, gasping as she climbs a single ﬂight of stairs, but she can “get by”
with that much oxygen.
Your child, your dog, and your friend can all “get by” with less than the
optimal levels of every basic bodily need. So can you. But the way you react
to your hungry child, your shivering dog, and your gasping friend is how we
feel about you “getting by” with too little rest. It’s not just that we believe you
deserve more; it’s that we know you’re suﬀering, and we want to bring you
relief.
Sophie worked in one of those high-powered professions where
people tend to burn out after one year because the expectation is
you’ll work sixteen hours a day, at least six days a week. People
who stop working at that pace are viewed as failures—they
“couldn’t take it.” They were “weak.”
Sophie—so used to being both the smartest person in the room
and the person viewed as the least valuable—tried to play the
game for a long time, but when it didn’t work out, she turned to
the science to ﬁnd out why.

[PDF page 169]

“Look,” she said to her supervisor from behind a stack of
research articles, “it says here that people are more creative, more
productive, more accurate, and generally do more and better work
when they work fewer hours. It seems counterintuitive, but it’s
true.”
He didn’t believe her and—worse, in Sophie’s opinion, because
he was supposed to be a scientist and therefore persuadable by
evidence—he didn’t even read the stack of research.
Sophie was learning to love herself more and more, better and
better, as she deepened her connection with Bernard. She wanted
her work to not make her so, so, so tired. She tried a few other
approaches to changing her workplace culture around overwork.
She shared a TED Talk about sleep with a few colleagues she
liked. She prompted HR to bring in a sleep expert to talk about the
neuroscience of sleep and innovation. She changed her own work
habits, based on the research, and experienced a boost in
creativity and energy.
We want to say that Sophie successfully changed the culture of
her workplace. She didn’t.
Instead, she took that boost in creativity and energy and used it
to start her own business.
She works a lot of hours, but when her body and brain tell her
they’re done for the day, she listens.
“I don’t want a doctor who’s been awake for twenty hours; I
don’t want a lawyer who bills more than twelve hours a day—I
know how sloppy work gets when somebody is fatigued—and you
shouldn’t want an engineer who isn’t sleeping seven hours a night.
Your work is crap if your brain isn’t rested.”
W here Can You Find the Time?
If you’re working multiple jobs just to keep a roof over your head and/or
raising young children with no help, then you truly might not have ten hours

[PDF page 170]

per day to recharge yourself. But let’s look at a typical American woman’s
week, assuming she has a full-time job, a spouse, and two young kids. If your
schedule is like hers, then you have time.36
On an average weekday, she spends about nine hours on work—that’s eight
hours at work and about ﬁfty minutes’ total commute time.37 She sleeps
about seven and three-quarters hours. She watches two and a half hours of
TV.38 She spends between one and three hours caring for others, about an
hour on household chores, and an hour eating and drinking. She spends her
remaining hour and a half on “other”—community and religious activities,
shopping, going to school, and grooming.
Boom. Twenty-four hours.
The obvious necessary shifts—more sleep, more exercise—have an equally
obvious solution: less time watching TV or shopping or doing chores,
whichever contributes least to your “default mode” time.

[PDF page 171]

Sleep is the one behavior that doesn’t really allow you to do other things at
the same time. The rest of the 42 percent you can use for multiple wellness
purposes simultaneously: Connect with your family and friends over a meal
or on a walk or at an exercise class. Bike to the farmers’ market. Live-tweet
Game of Thrones with a thousand fellow fans. What matters is that it is
cordoned oﬀ for “well-being time.”
Broken down this way, it’s almost painfully simple and obvious: sleep,
food, friends, and movement. You can use the following worksheet to track
your time and notice the opportunities you can create to increase the rest
you’re getting.

[PDF page 172]

24/7 W O RKSHEET
On the ﬁrst calendar, mark your actual time use. If you have a pretty stable
schedule, you can ﬁll it out all at once. If your schedule tends to change, ﬁll it
out each day to see how these next seven days go.
1. Block out time for sleep. At minimum, it should be a realistic
representation of when you really do sleep. Be sure to include in
your sleep time the time it takes you to fall asleep and the time
between when your alarm goes oﬀ and when you actually get up.
This is your complete “sleep opportunity.”
2. Block out regularly occurring events, including:
a. work (with commute);
b. kids’ activities and care;
c. social activities, including those with partner (don’t
forget sex);
d. meals, including preparation time;
e. bathing/showering/hair time;
f. shopping (including groceries and online shopping);
and
g. TV, Internet/social-media use, solo games, and
staring at your phone.
3. Approximate less-regular but anticipatable activities, like
doctors’ appointments, car maintenance, home repair, etc. An
easy way to get a rough estimate is to look at how much time
you’ve spent on these things over the previous twelve months.
Add up all that time, divide it by ﬁfty-two, and you’ll have the
average time per week.

[PDF page 173]

4. Color-code each activity by types of needs they fulﬁll:
connection, rest (both sleep and mind-wandering), meaning, and
completing the cycle.
—
On the second calendar (“Ideal” 24/7 Calendar), imagine the ways you might,
hypothetically, make your time use more like the “ideal”—“ideal” being
entirely subjective. You’re the one who knows whether you need more sleep,
more stress-cycle completion, more connection, or just more time.
1. Ideally, your sleep schedule is a solid block of the same seven
to nine hours every day, including weekends, but you can make
up a shortfall with naps or extra sleep on the weekends.
2. Reserve thirty minutes of each day for a “stress-reducing
conversation.” If your stress-reducing conversation partner is
your life partner, you might also add a weekly hour-long “state of
the union” conversation. Research recommends these as the
standards for sustaining a satisfying relationship.39
3. Include thirty to sixty minutes for physical activity three to six
days per week, plus any prep/travel time.
4. Code as before—social, rest, meaning, and completing the
cycle.
5. Code some activities, like some phone use, shopping, or meal
prep that you haven’t been using for mind-wandering rest time,
and see if you can transition your state of mind from one of
fretful worry to calm future-mapping.
6. BONUS: Mark activities that smash patriarchy. Example: If
you work in a job where women are underrepresented, all your
work and commute time is patriarchy smashin’. If you parent a
child with the goal of transmitting positive and inclusive gender

[PDF page 174]

norms, that’s patriarchy smashin’. If you are a woman of color, a
hijabi in the West, not heterosexual or cisgender, or live with a
disability, literally every waking moment is patriarchy smashin’.
—
The payoﬀ of spending more time resting is that during the remaining 58
percent of your life, you’re more energized, more focused, more creative, and
nicer to be around—not to mention a safer driver, less likely to make
mistakes that will cost you later, and more likely to enjoy what you’re doing,
rather than simply feeling that it’s the “right” thing to do.
We know what to do, and we have the time to do it. Simple. Obvious.
Easy. Right?
Of course not. If it were simple and obvious and easy, we’d all already be
doing it. So what makes this simple, obvious change so diﬃcult for so many
people?
In his book Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams,
Matthew Walker describes our cultural neglect of sleep as a “suﬀocating
noose,” and insists “a radical shift in our personal, cultural, professional, and
societal appreciation of sleep must occur.”40 For instance, we need schools—
especially high schools—to open later, which requires that parents have
ﬂexibility about their work hours, which requires that employers prioritize
workers’ ability to meet the demands of family equally with the demands of
the organization. That’s just one example of the fundamental systemic
changes necessary to create a world where we all have the resources to be
rested and well. Getting adequate rest will not be easy.

[PDF page 175]



[PDF page 176]

After you ﬁnish this chapter and make a plan to improve your rest, you’re
going to ﬁnd yourself back in a world that is structured in a way that makes
prioritizing rest diﬃcult. But the barriers between women and rest are
diﬀerent and perhaps more diﬃcult than those for men. Because: Human
Giver Syndrome.
The Slow  Leak
Human Giver Syndrome puts up barriers between us and rest. We feel guilty
for sleeping. We criticize ourselves for doing what is necessary for our own
survival and not doing all the other things we could be doing. To sleep as

[PDF page 177]

much as we need is to spend a third of our lives not paying attention to the
needs of others, and what good human giver would allow that?
Judging your need for rest is a slow leak that drains the eﬀectiveness of the
rest you get. At the start of this chapter, we said that rest is what makes you
stronger, and we already know Human Giver Syndrome doesn’t want you to
be stronger.
We want you to be strong, healthy, conﬁdent, and joyful, so we want you
to turn toward those slow leaks and patch them with kindness and
compassion.
“Hey there, resentment,” you say. “I get it. It’s frustrating to be working
hard toward a deadline and have the need for sleep slow down your progress.
Being a hominid is a drag sometimes, but it’s the only family we’ve got.” (Get
it? Hominid? Family?)
Or “Hello, worry. You’re here because the things I do really matter to me,
and you want to make sure I don’t fall short. But you and I both know that if I
don’t get the rest, I’ll do a crappy job at all these things that matter.”
And even, “Hi, rage. I know our family raised us to believe we didn’t
matter unless we were perfect, and perfect means we never stop working, and
it’s right to be angry that we didn’t get the warm, unconditional acceptance
every child is born deserving. Let’s treat ourselves as we wanted to be treated,
granting ourselves permission to be human.”
“Oh, you’re well rested?” snarks Human Giver Syndrome. “Good for you.
Self-care is so important. How nice for you, that you have that kind of time.”
What a person with that message is really saying is, “How dare you break
the rules and treat yourself as if you matter? How dare you respect your body,
when I’m not allowed to respect mine? What’s the matter with you? Get back
in line.”
When that happens, remind yourself that the comment is coming from
someone who is suﬀering from Human Giver Syndrome, just like the rest of
us.
“Good for you…” says a passive-aggressive colleague, and you can say, “It
is good for me,” in amazed wonder.
You can say, “I used to think it was selﬁsh to prioritize sleep, but then I
realized the opposite was true. The people I love and the work I care about

[PDF page 178]

deserve me at my best, not exhausted and cranky and unfocused.”
Or “I realized I was treating myself worse than I would ever want to see a
friend treating themselves, and then I realized that some part of me really
believed I should somehow need less rest than they did. How arrogant, right?
Accepting that I need rest was a humbling experience, but a necessary one.”
Or simply smile. Remind yourself that they’re suﬀfering from Human
Giver Syndrome, which is exhausting. You know it is, because you are, too.
You Can’t Spell “Resist” W ithout “Rest”
Most of the books and articles about prioritizing sleep and rest make the
argument that we’re more productive when we get adequate rest.41 It’s true
that rest makes us more productive, ultimately, and if that’s an argument that
helps you persuade your boss to give you more ﬂexibility, awesome. But we
think rest matters not because it makes you more productive, but because it
makes you happier and healthier, less grumpy, and more creative. We think
rest matters because you matter. You are not here to be “productive.” You are
here to be you, to engage with your Something Larger, to move through the
world with conﬁdence and joy. And to do that, you require rest.
Our culture treats you as if “being productive” is the most important
measure of your worth, as if you are a consumable good. You are a tube of
toothpaste to be squeezed relentlessly until empty. For some people and for
some parts of our history, this has been explicit and literal, as in slavery.
Artist, social justice activist, and founder of Love Gangster Ministries, Tricia
Hersey-Patrick, has established the “Nap Ministry,” organizing “collective
napping installations” where people of color sleep in public spaces, as
commentary on and action against the generations of labor stolen from black
bodies in the United States. Her work is a direct answer to the cultural
message that people who give their bodies the rest required to survive are
“lazy.” Sleep is a racial justice issue as well as a gender issue, a class issue,
and a basic public health issue. Sleep can heal more than your body; it can
begin to heal cultural wounds.

[PDF page 179]

Sometimes we mistake our guilt about resting as our passionate
commitment to the people and ideas we cherish most. But in reality, the
status quo thrives in a context where people who want to change the world
believe that sleep is a sign of weakness and that rest is the enemy.
The cliché that “we won’t rest until…!” suggests we shouldn’t rest until the
world is, say, a safe place for everyone. But when we deprive ourselves of our
own basic needs as mammals under the misguided apprehension that that’s
how we show our commitment to an issue or to the people we love, we burn
out. And then we drop out. Only by making sure we have as much energy
coming in as we have going out can we all stay committed to the people,
work, and ideas we love. What we’re saying is: An overlooked aspect of being
“woke” is getting enough sleep.
Since Julie could handle it, Jeremy continued to vent about his
week in charge of Diana’s daily routine. He said, “How can I love
her so much and yet want to lock her in her room so I can get a
break? It’s exhausting.”
Julie nodded. “I know.”
He rolled his eyes—at her? at himself?—and slumped in his
chair. “I know you know, I’m not saying that, and I’m not saying I
didn’t know. But it’s diﬀerent now. The hard part isn’t caring so
much all the time; the hard part is sometimes you have to shut oﬀ
the caring, and it’s like shutting oﬀ a ﬁre hydrant. I don’t want to
yell, I don’t want to be the asshole dad who yells. I don’t want her
to think there’s anything normal about a man yelling at her, you
know?”
“I know,” Julie repeated, remembering some of why she loved
him.
“But then she’s so infuriating and I want to just— But that’s not
who I want to be as a father, so I have to swallow it and be calm
and not react. I have to encourage her and set time limits and be
chipper and explain what’s great about doing the thing she doesn’t
want to do, and it’s exhausting,” he repeated.

[PDF page 180]

“Yeah,” Julie said, wondering if he would recognize that she
had been doing all that for him for a decade.
“I’m a good dad,” Jeremy insisted, apparently trying to remind
himself as much as her.
Julie took a deep breath and let it out slowly, not letting the
wave of emotion stick inside her. “Yes,” she said. She hesitated, not
wanting to pick a ﬁght, then added, “We’re both better parents
when we get to take a break sometimes.”
With a tiny laugh at the happy memory, she mimicked his Flynn
Rider “smolder” look at him, then said, “The thing about emotions
—what I’ve learned is, you have to complete the stress response
cycle that’s activated but unﬁnished because you were staying in
control of it. Then you can move to the next thing.”
“Yes,” Jeremy said. Then he said, “What do you mean,
‘complete the cycle’?”
—
Speaking at Smith College in January 2017, MSNBC host Rachel Maddow
answered a question from the audience (full disclosure: from Emily) about
how she deals with burnout. She said, “I leave [work] and come [home] and
spend time outdoors, and I have the world’s most perfect family and great
dogs and I go ﬁshing and I chop wood and I use diﬀerent parts of my brain.
And that’s the only cure that I really know of; when you are burned out, it’s
because you burned a speciﬁc gear in your brain, but the Lord gave us a lot of
diﬀerent gears. When you use the other ones, you regenerate.”
Most of us have spent our whole lives being taught to believe everyone
else’s opinions about our bodies, rather than to believe what our own bodies
are trying to tell us. For some of us, it’s been so long since we listened to our
bodies, we hardly know how to start understanding what they’re trying to tell
us, much less how to trust and believe what they’re saying. To make matters
worse, the more exhausted we are, the noisier the signal is, and the harder it
is to hear the message.

[PDF page 181]

Without rest, you are not fully yourself. Without sleep, you will literally
die.
And beyond mere survival, rest is a ﬁrst step to listening to and believing
your body.
The next step is learning to live peaceably with that wildly noisy voice in
your head that tells you not to rest, tells you you’re failing. We call her “the
madwoman in the attic,” and she’s the subject of the next, and last, chapter.
tl;dr:
•We will literally die without rest. Literally. Finding time for
rest is not a #ﬁrstworldproblem; it’s about survival.
•We are not built to persist incessantly, but to oscillate from
eﬀort to rest and back again. On average we need to spend
42 percent of our time—ten hours a day—on rest. If we
don’t take the time to rest, then our bodies will revolt and
force us to take the time.
•Human Giver Syndrome tells us it’s “self-indulgent” to rest,
which makes as much sense as believing it’s weak or self-
indulgent to breathe.
•Getting the rest your body requires is an act of resistance
against the forces that are trying to rig the game and make
you helpless. Reclaim rest and you reclaim sovereignty over
your own life.

[PDF page 182]

8
G RO W  M IG H TY
To understand Sophie, you need to know about the series ﬁnale of
Star Trek. It’s called “Turnabout Intruder,” and in it we meet Dr.
Janice Lester, an ambitious woman driven to madness by her
failure to get a captaincy because “the world of starship captains
doesn’t admit women.” Lester forcibly switches bodies with
Captain Kirk so that she can ﬁnally be a captain, but of course she
is foiled, because: Kirk. At the end of the episode, having been
forced back into her own body, she sobs, “I’m never going to be
the captain,” a textbook image of a woman pushed away from her
Something Larger, oﬀ the Monitor’s emotional cliﬀ, into the pit of
helpless, hopeless despair.
After she’s escorted away, Kirk muses, “Her life might have
been as rich as any woman’s, if only…if only.”
The end of Kirk’s thought, we know from things he said earlier
in the episode is, “if only she hadn’t hated her own womanhood.”
Sophie’s relationship with Star Trek became more complicated
when she ﬁnally got to the end and discovered that’s how the
whole series ends. It makes Sophie slightly bananas that the series
ends with this fatalistic message about the intractability of the
patriarchy (ugh), locking women out of the highest leadership
positions even in the twenty-third century!
Sophie told us, “When I’m doing that progressive-muscle-
tension-and-relaxation thing, what I’m imagining is Janice Lester
beating the shit out of Kirk. She runs back after that ‘if only’

[PDF page 183]

comment and is like, ‘IF ONLY WHAT, BITCH?! If only I hadn’t
“hated my own womanhood,” you misogynist asshat? I don’t hate
being a woman, I hate that I only wanted the same thing you
wanted, but because of my body, I couldn’t have it! And yeah, it
made me crazy, and then you said I couldn’t have it because I was
crazy!’ And she beats him to a bloody pulp and everybody’s like,
‘Yeah, he had that coming a long time.’ ”
The Janice Lester part of Sophie’s mind looks at the chasm
between reality and hope, and it craves change. Lately, Sophie’s
been thinking that this part of her might be worth listening to.
This chapter is about why that’s such an excellent idea.
—
Imagine you walk into a room and you hear your best friend in conversation
with a stranger.
The stranger is saying, “It’s your own fault you got hurt. Why were you so
stupid you let that guy near you?”
Or, “Just shut up. Nobody cares. You’re not even worth listening to.”
Or, “You’re a fat, lazy bitch.”
How would it feel, to hear this mean stranger say those things to your best
friend? Would it be comfortable? Would you ever say these things, in this
way, to your best friend?
Of course not.
So why do so many of us say such things to ourselves? Like, every day?
You deserve respect and love; you deserve to be cherished. You deserve
kindness, right now, just as you are. Not when you lose ten pounds, or a
hundred. Not when you get a promotion or ﬁnish your degree or get married
or come out or have a baby. Now.
We are surely not the ﬁrst people to tell you that, and yet the mean stranger
in your head is still beating you up. In this chapter, we’ll talk about where the
mean stranger came from and what you can do about her. As with body
acceptance, we can’t say you’ll end up living a life free of self-criticism. But

[PDF page 184]

we can say you’ll live a life of more self-kindness, which will lead to greater
joy, better health, stronger relationships, and greater capacity to cope when
you’re struggling.
Let’s learn how.
The M adwoman in the Attic
Amelia’s favorite book is Jane Eyre. When she ﬁrst read it as a teenager, she
couldn’t have articulated the metaphor in the book that so resonated with her:
the madwoman living in the attic. Rochester, the hero, has—spoiler—his
insane wife locked in his attic. And when you think about it, who doesn’t? A
demon in our past or our present that taunts us and tries to stop us from doing
the things we most want to do. The metaphor is both so ubiquitous and so
resonant, whole books have been written about the madwoman as a literary
symbol of women’s entrapment in dichotomous roles of “demon” and
“angel.”1 Activist and scholar Peggy McIntosh wrote about hers in 1989,
describing her madwoman this way:
She is alternately oﬀ the wall with anger at those who have made
her feel like a fraud, and oﬀ the ﬂoor with a visionary sense of
her own elemental connection with the universe….[She writes,] “I
MAY NOT KNOW WHO I AM BUT YOU SURE AS HELL DON’T,
YOU GODDOM [sic] PHONIES, SO DON’T YOU TELL ME
WHO I AM.” The other day she looked at me and said, “You need
me. I’ll be here for you.” Now, I spend a lot of time taking care of
her, and when I do it is very hard on my family. And here she is
telling me I need her. Thanks a lot.”2
Each person’s madwoman is diﬀerent. For you, maybe she’s more like a
shadow, following you around, a perpetual reminder of what you’re not; or a
spindly creature lurking under the bed until you put on some jeans that feel
tight or send a text you immediately wish you hadn’t sent; or, as one friend of
ours put it, “a whiny, annoying brat of a six-year-old who thinks she knows

[PDF page 185]

everything and will not—give me strength—shut up unless I take deep
breaths for her, then she goes quiet.”
Another friend said, “She’s the skinnier, younger-looking, richer, better-
dressed, prettier-by-societal-standards, lives-in-the-amazing-and-much-
larger-house-next-door-with-the-perfect-lawn version of me. On the outside,
she really seems to have her shit together. But I know (and I have to keep
reminding myself all of the time) that deep down somewhere in her, she is
sadder and lonelier and doesn’t have much more than what is on her outside,
than me.”
Still another friend said, “Mine is more like a teenage version: the smart,
quiet, yet sad and downtrodden girl who always sat in the back of class and
no one talked to….When something goes wrong, I can hear her ‘told you so’
voice in the back of my mind.”
Again and again, women describe their madwoman as an uncomfortable,
even unpleasant person…and they describe her fragility, vulnerability, or
sadness.
This uncomfortable, fragile part of ourselves serves a very important
function. She grew inside us, to manage the chasm between who we are and
who Human Giver Syndrome expects us to be. She is the part of us that has
the impossible, tormenting task of bridging the unbridgeable chasm between
us and this “expected-us.” It’s a form of torture, like Sisyphus rolling a rock
up a hill only to have it roll back down each time. She’s forever oscillating
from rage to helpless despair.
If you have beaten yourself up for needing to say no to a friend, that was
the madwoman. If you have felt sure that a broken relationship was all your
fault, that there had to be something more you could have done, that was the
madwoman. If you, like so many women we know, have struggled when you
look in a mirror, it’s the madwoman you see looking back at you.
When the unbridgeable chasm between us and expected-us looms, our
madwoman assesses the situation and decides what the problem is. She has
only two options: Is the world a lying asshole, with bogus expectations? Or is
there something wrong with us?
Some madwomen are more protective than destructive; some are more sad
than angry; some have a sense of humor. They are the shadow, the hurt little

[PDF page 186]

girl, the downtrodden teenager, the “perfect” version of ourselves, the
madwoman in the attic yelling terrible things that echo through the house.
What’s yours like? Take a few minutes to imagine her—her
uncomfortableness and her fragility, both.
G ET TO KNOW YOU R “M ADWOM AN”
Describe your madwoman, in words or illustration. Tune in to the diﬃcult,
fragile part of yourself that tries to bridge the unbridgeable chasm between
you and expected-you. What does she look like? When was she born? What
is her history?
What does she say to you? Write out her feelings and thoughts. Notice
where she’s harshly critical of you, shaming, or perfectionistic. You may even
want to mark those places. Highlight them in diﬀerent colors. Those are
sources of exhaustion.
Can you hear sadness or fear under her madness? Ask her what she fears
or what she’s grieving. Listen to her stories—never forgetting she’s a
madwoman. Remind her that you are the grown-up, the homeowner, or the
teacher, and she can trust you to maintain the attic so that she always has a
safe place to stay.
Thank her for the hard work she has done to help you survive.
 
Harsh Self-Criticism
In her memoir, Yes Please, Amy Poehler describes her madwoman as a
demon that “moves its sour mouth up to your ear and reminds you that you
are fat and ugly and don’t deserve love.”3 (In the audiobook, the demon is

[PDF page 187]

voiced by Kathleen Turner.) That is harsh self-criticism, where the gap
between you and expected-you is both your fault and a sign of your essential
failure in life. The result is guilt and shame.
As Brené Brown says, “Guilt is, ‘I made a mistake.’ Shame is, ‘I am a
mistake.’ ” With guilt, as opposed to shame, there is at least a pretense that
one day you might deserve to participate fully in the human experience. With
shame, your core self is judged.4
Perhaps more insidious than the self-criticism of failure is the self-
criticism of success. This self-criticism sneaks in when you win an award or
receive a letter of thanks. “Who do you think you are?” hisses the madwoman.
“You think you’re as good as those other people? Well, you’re not! So don’t
start thinking you might be ‘all right just the way you are.’ Now, get back in
line!”
Toxic Perfectionism
Another way that some madwomen wreak havoc is with toxic perfectionism.
Perfectionism is a lot of diﬀerent things—some of them generally benign or
even beneﬁcial, and some potentially very toxic.5
Generally benign: preferring tidiness and organization over messiness;
being detail-oriented and checking your work for mistakes; and having high
standards for yourself or others. Any of these factors can become toxic and,
at their extreme, are even associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
That happens when perfectionism functions as a maladaptive strategy to cope
with stress, depression, anxiety, loneliness, repressed rage, and helpless
despair. But if you’re coping well with your feelings (using planful problem-
solving and positive reappraisal), then high standards and orderliness aren’t
going to do you any harm.
Generally toxic: believing that if things aren’t perfect, they aren’t any good
—e.g., if you make one mistake, everything is ruined—and feeling pressure
from other people to succeed at everything you do. These domains of
perfectionism are associated with depression, anxiety, disordered eating,
negative relationships, and feelings of helplessness in the world.

[PDF page 188]

The fundamental problem with perfectionism is that it does terrible things
to your Monitor. You have the goal of “perfection,” which is an impossible
goal, as you start the project or the meal or the outﬁt or the day, and then as
soon as something falls short of “perfect,” the whole thing is ruined. And
sometimes if your goal is “perfect,” some part of you already knows that it’s
an impossible goal, so you think about your project or meal or outﬁt or day,
knowing you’re never going to achieve your goal, and so you feel hopeless
before you’ve even begun.
Self-Compassion
The opposite of harsh self-criticism and toxic perfectionism is self-
compassion. The last twenty years have seen an explosion of research that
shows us how much better people do when they engage in less self-criticism
and more self-compassion.6 You’ve probably heard about self-compassion.
You’ve seen Kristin Neﬀ’s TEDx talk or read her or Chris Germer’s books or
it’s one of those things you know you should do, like meditation or
mindfulness or gratitude. You’ve thought to yourself, Yeah, we should all be
gentler with ourselves! or I shouldn’t be so harsh with myself.
And you’re right; self-compassion is good for you. Or at least, the absence
of self-compassion is harmful—it results in self-judgment, isolation, and
overidentiﬁcation with our suﬀering.7 Self-compassion reduces depression,
anxiety, and disordered eating. It improves overall life satisfaction. When you
are gentle with yourself, you grow mighty.
Maybe you tried self-compassion for a while…and maybe you slipped
back into the habit of beating yourself up.
And then someone reminded you about self-compassion, and you said, “I
know, I should be nicer to myself; I’m such a—”
STOP RIGHT THERE. That’s our sister you’re talking about, and we’re
not going to let you say mean things about her.
If self-compassion is so good for us, why don’t we do it?
After a decade of teaching self-compassion and a lifetime of living with
our own madwomen, we’ve found three reasons why this whole self-

[PDF page 189]

compassion thing, which seems so appealing, might be surprisingly diﬃcult.

[PDF page 190]

Self-Compassion Is Hard, Part 1: We Need Our Whips…Don’t
We?
A lot of us spend our lives pushing ourselves to work harder, do more, be
better; feeling like a failure when we fall short of someone’s expectation; and
chastising ourselves for “being arrogant” if we celebrate a success or
“settling” if we accept something short of perfection. Often when we
experience the chasm between us and expected-us, the madwoman whips us
—that is, we whip ourselves. Perversely, we’ve also spent our lives achieving
everything that we’ve achieved so far, whether that’s academic degrees,
escaping an unstable family life, attaining ﬁnancial success, or building a
family of our own.
This is the tragedy of the madwoman. She whips us, and we achieve
things. And so we think the whipping is why we achieved things and we’ll
never achieve anything without the whipping.
This is the most common reason we hear when people resist self-
compassion. They’re worried that if they stop beating themselves up, they’ll
lose all motivation, they’ll just sit around watching Real Housewives of
Anywhere and eating Lucky Charms in a bowl full of Bud Light.
This argument doesn’t stand up to even the most superﬁcial investigation.
Are we really working toward our goals only because we’ll torture ourselves if
we stop, so that as soon as we put down the whip we’ll sink into eternal
apathy? Of course not. In fact, it’s the opposite: We only whip ourselves
because our goals matter so much that we’re willing to suﬀer this self-
inﬂicted pain if that’s what it takes. And we believe that because we’ve always
done it that way, it must be why we’ve accomplished as much as we have.
Diligent practice of self-compassion works; it lowers stress hormones and
improves mood.8 And many years of research have conﬁrmed that self-
forgiveness is associated with greater physical and mental well-being.9 All
without diminishing your motivation to do the things that matter to you.
Many women reading this will ﬁnd, when they confront their madwoman’s
harsh criticism and toxic perfectionism, that deep down they know they are

[PDF page 191]

doing their best and they can forgive themselves for the ways their best
sometimes falls short. They can begin to notice the ways they whip
themselves, and practice putting down the whip, because they see that it’s not
the whip that makes them stronger; it’s their persistence, their relationships,
their ability to rest. They know that self-kindness helps them grow mightier,
and they want that strength.
But for some of us, a harsh, toxic madwoman is telling us we don’t deserve
lower stress or improved mood. She says it’s right that we should suﬀer; we
don’t deserve kindness or compassion or to grow mighty. And so she will
punish us forever, no matter what we achieve.
This dynamic is not just self-criticism, it’s self-persecution.10 Folks with
more history of abuse and neglect, parental rejection and humiliation are
more likely to experience harsh self-criticism and react to it with a sense of
helplessness and isolation.11 When people with depression try to be self-
reassuring, their brains respond with threat activation.12 In fact, fear of
compassion for self is linked to fear of compassion from others. That means
that somewhere inside them, they believe that if they’re isolated, that’s good;
isolation protects others from their real, core badness. And if they’re
suﬀering, that’s good; it prevents them from growing mighty, which might
lead to them having power that they would inevitably fail to use eﬀectively, or
might even abuse.
If that’s you, don’t start with self-compassion; start with lovingkindness
toward others. Metta meditations, as they’re known in Buddhism, involve
wishing love, compassion, peace, and ease on everyone from the people we
care about most to people we hardly know to total strangers to our worst
enemies—and even on ourselves. When self-compassion feels out of reach,
try lovingkindness for others.
It was reckoning with her madwoman that ﬁnally allowed Julie to
feel comfortable with imperfection.
Amelia told her about the idea, including the whole Jane Eyre
thing, which the English teacher in her loved.
“So that’s your madwoman?” Julie asked. “Bertha in a back
room?”

[PDF page 192]

“I think so, yeah,” Amelia said. “She’s insane and dangerous,
but she’s also trapped up there by society’s ignorance. I have a lot
of sympathy for her.”
“How about Emily? What’s her madwoman?”
“Have you seen Moana?”
“Only about seven hundred times. I have a kid, remember.”
“Emily says her madwoman is Te Kã, the scary lava monster
who, it turns out, is also Te Fiti, the goddess of life.”
“Huh. It’s interesting that neither one is what she appears on the
surface,” Julie said. “I’m gonna think about this.”
She did. At ﬁrst, she thought her madwoman was a “perfect”
version of herself. The perfect wife and mother, the perfect
teacher, the perfect friend, the perfect daughter. Perfect. Cheerful,
patient, wise, eﬀortlessly good at everything, never needing
anything. Casually contemptuous of real Julie, with her needs and
her ﬂaws and her human limits.
Worst of all, Perfect Julie made Julie mean not just to herself
but to other people. Sometimes she criticized other people.
Sometimes she was mean to Jeremy, for not living up to Perfect
Julie’s standards.
But one Saturday afternoon, she got home from physical
therapy to ﬁnd Diana and Jeremy at the kitchen table together,
Diana doing homework, Jeremy grading. Julie looked at her
daughter and wondered what kind of madwoman was growing in
the young girl’s brain, wondered how she was coping with the
absurd expectations the world was just beginning to impose on
her.
And she realized “Perfect Julie” was just a defense she had
constructed, to protect her real madwoman—who wasn’t a
woman at all, but a little girl.
This little girl was sensitive and afraid of rejection. She loved
books and theater. She put on “Perfect Julie” the way a little girl
might put on her mother’s shoes and lipstick, playing pretend. She
wore “adulting” as a costume. It had been a game at ﬁrst, like

[PDF page 193]

playing house, back when she was Diana’s age. But as Julie had
gotten older, the Perfect Julie costume became necessary to
disguise the fact that she was, underneath it all, just a girl who
didn’t want to make anyone mad.
Once she saw through her madwoman’s façade, the rest was
easy. From that day on, when she felt the contempt of Perfect
Julie, she could turn toward that critical voice as she would to any
little girl, hiding behind a mask.
“Hey, kiddo,” she could tell herself. “You don’t have to pretend
with me.”
She could hold the imaginary little girl in her grown-up lap and
reassure her that no one was mad and it’s okay to need things.
People will be there for her.

[PDF page 194]

Self-Compassion Is Hard, Part 2: Healing Hurts
For decades, whenever you found yourself falling short of some standard—
grades not good enough, face not pretty enough, emotions not controlled
enough, loved ones not happy enough—you ﬂayed yourself with the whip,
and you worked harder. Each time, the whip opened up wounds in your soul,
reopened old wounds, and stung and hurt and made you bleed.
Beating ourselves up results in pain, obviously, so at the same time that
we’re beating ourselves up, we’re looking for ways to manage that pain, to
make it bearable. Many of us simply get used to walking around in some
degree of pain all the time; we consider it normal. It’s the cost of holding on
to hope that we will, one day, meet Human Giver Syndrome’s standard and
ﬁnally, at long last, fully belong in the human community and deserve love.
Sometimes the injuries are so severe that we turn to dangerous measures—
alcohol and other drugs, self-harm, disordered eating, compulsive behaviors
—measures that may numb the pain in the short term, but ultimately deepen
the wounds in the long term.
So here we are, telling you to put down the whip.
Reality check: What would actually happen if we put down the whip,
stopped beating ourselves up, and turned toward our diﬃcult feelings with
kindness and compassion?
Imagine trying it. Let your madwoman put down the whip.
The next thing that happens is that those wounds you’ve been inﬂicting and
reopening for years…ﬁnally begin to heal.
And here’s a fact about healing that most self-help gurus are not honest
about: Healing hurts.
If you break your leg, it hurts. And it keeps hurting until it’s not broken
anymore. There is no time between the moment your leg breaks and the
moment it’s healed when it feels better than it did before you broke it.
Because healing hurts. And what do you do about a broken leg? You put it in
a cast, to create an environment of holding that will allow the leg to heal.

[PDF page 195]

Once you stop reopening wounds you’ve been inﬂicting on yourself for
years, they ﬁnally begin to heal. And it’s a new kind of pain; it can’t be
managed by the same strategies you’ve been using to manage the pain of the
whip. You were good at managing that old kind of pain, and now you have to
learn a whole new way to deal with this whole new kind of pain. As one
client of “compassionate mind therapy” put it, if they started practicing self-
compassion, they “would open up a well of unbearable sadness.”13
A friend of ours, sex therapist Rena McDaniel, talks about this kind of
pain as the sting of antiseptic in a wound. It’s a healthy kind of pain; it helps
the wound to heal cleanly. Reframing it this way (positive reappraisal) helps
us tolerate it and helps us ﬁnd strategies for managing it that aren’t numbing
or potentially toxic, but facilitate the healing.
Amelia prefers this lobster analogy: A lobster is a squishy animal stuﬀed
inside a hard shell. It grows, but the shell does not. Eventually, it gets too big
for the shell, and the discomfort of that conﬁnement leads it to scuttle under a
rock, shed the too-small constraint, and grow a new, bigger, thicker shell. The
process is uncomfortable, and leaves the lobster temporarily vulnerable, but
ultimately it gains new size and strength that it would never have developed if
it hadn’t gone through the struggle.
Whichever metaphor you prefer, self-compassion isn’t always a
comfortable or peaceful experience, but it does help us grow mightier. Which
brings us to:

[PDF page 196]

Self-Compassion Is Hard, Part 3: Strength Is Scary
Imagine that you’ve let go of the desire to meet that external standard. You’ve
put down the whip, and those wounds have begun to heal, so you’ve learned
new strategies for managing this new, healing kind of pain.
Then what?
Ah. Then.
As we heal…we grow stronger. And stronger. And stronger. Stronger than
we’ve ever been before. Stronger, perhaps, than we ever thought possible. We
become strong enough not to feel pushed around by Human Giver Syndrome.
And Human Giver Syndrome will ﬁght back. We will feel backlash. We
may fear the world’s punishment if we dare to grow mighty.
But sometimes our own strength is scary to us, too. How do you feel about
the idea of being that strong?
The truth is, a lot of us are scared of how mighty we might grow if we
were no longer draining our energy on managing all the self-inﬂicted pain of
self-criticism.
We know that with greater personal power would come greater personal
responsibility, and we’re afraid when we have the greater power, we won’t be
able to deal with those greater responsibilities. Let’s say you have a hobby
that beneﬁts other people, and you start getting paid for it. It turns into a
small business, and that small business grows. Eventually, you’re going to
have to restructure your life, learn about marketing and corporate tax
liability, meet with potential partners and clients, hire people and be
responsible for their welfare, and now it’s not just you and your hobby, it’s
other people’s livelihoods on the line. A lot of us have a quiet little voice
worrying that we’ll get up in that corporate oﬃce and have no idea what we’re
actually doing. As a person with a hobby, you’re not ready for all of that now,
and it’s diﬃcult to imagine what it will feel like and how ready you could be
after you go through the process of growing. The diﬃculty of imagining
ourselves with the knowledge, expertise, and strengths we will gain in the
future can stop us entirely from moving toward that future.

[PDF page 197]

—
Self-compassion: it’s hard at ﬁrst. That’s normal. For some people, it stays
hard. Also normal. But the result of practicing self-compassion is that you
grow mighty. Here’s how:

[PDF page 198]

How to G row M ighty, Part 1: Befriend Your M adwoman
If you didn’t imagine a persona for your “madwoman,” take the time to do
that. Do it now; we’ll wait.
Okay.
The purpose of personifying your madwoman in the attic is to separate
yourself from her, to create a dynamic where you can relate to her the way
you relate to your friends—with connected knowing. We are, in general, far
better at connected knowing with other people than with ourselves.14
Somehow—and it’s not clear why—even the most intuitive connected knower
is likely to shift into separate knowing when they relate to their own internal
experience. Which is to say, when we think about our lives, we strip our
decisions and actions of context and identity; we evaluate them based on the
false standards of Human Giver Syndrome. But when we can personify our
self-criticism, we can relate to it more eﬀectively. Some form of
“personiﬁcation” appears as a feature of so many diﬀerent therapeutic
modalities, it’s clear that many diﬀerent people and approaches have
recognized the power of stepping to one side of our self-criticism and
observing it with friendly curiosity.15
Personifying our self-criticism allows us to apply connected knowing. With
connected knowing, you can separate your self from your madwoman and
build a relationship with her—maybe even a friendship. This friendship with
your own internal experience is powerful. When you’re seriously struggling
and positive reappraisal isn’t enough to make the struggle tolerable, self-
compassion can help.16 In the animated ﬁlm Inside Out, Joy can’t cheer up
Bing Bong by telling him “Hey, it’s gonna be okay. We can ﬁx this!” Positive
reappraisal. It doesn’t work. Instead, it’s when Sadness sits with him and cries
with him in compassionate sympathy that Bing Bong feels better. Especially
among people with high self-criticism and shame, turning toward your
internal experience with kindness and compassion is more healing than
positive reappraisal.17

[PDF page 199]

There is and always will be a chasm between you and expected-you. What
matters is not the size of the chasm or the nature of the chasm or anything
else. What matters is how you manage it—which is to say, how you relate to
your madwoman.
Turn toward that self-critical part of you with kindness and compassion.
Thank her for the hard work she has done to help you survive.

[PDF page 200]

How to G row M ighty, Part 2: “Turn and Face the Strange”
That’s a lyric from David Bowie’s song “Changes.” It’s about noticing what’s
happening, no matter what, without actively ﬁghting it. It’s really what this
book is about: Know what’s true. And, if you can, love what’s true. But the
ﬁrst step is knowing what’s true—all of it. Even the parts that make you
uncomfortable. It is perhaps the most potent “active ingredient” in
mindfulness.18
Sometimes you’ll hear this experience described as “acceptance,” as in
discussions of certain aspects of Buddhist meditation practice. We don’t
prefer that word, because it carries an unintended connotation of helplessness
—as in “Just accept that this is true…and therefore abandon any hope that
you can change it.”
So instead we use the term “observational distance.”
Most people are not naturally good at it, but it’s a learnable skill.
We’ll illustrate this with a comparatively benign example. Homeowners in
our part of the world (western Massachusetts) receive monthly letters from
the power company, comparing our energy usage to our neighbors’. This kind
of peer comparison information has been shown to reduce energy usage,
which saves people money and reduces our carbon footprint.19 In an ideal
world, the information would simply remind us to ask ourselves, “Is there
more I can be doing?” even if the answer stays, “I’m already doing all I can.”
But people hate it when the letter says their energy use is higher than their
neighbors’. They feel shamed by the utility company; they think the numbers
are bogus; they think it’s a scam (which is weird—what could the utility
company have to gain by making people feel bad for using a lot of their
product?). We heard one woman call it “a witch hunt.”
So what’s going on, to provoke this reaction of shame and rage?
When we’re told that our energy usage is higher than our neighbors’, the
madwoman is activated by the diﬀerence between who we are, in terms of
our energy usage, and who we are expected to be—super-eﬃcient, yurt-
dwelling models of green living. And the madwoman has only two choices:

[PDF page 201]

either we’re wrong or the power company is. Either we’re terrible people for
burning all that fossil fuel, in which case our madwoman goes on a rampage
of shaming self-criticism, or else the power company is a lying asshole for
telling us we’re burning all that fossil fuel and our madwoman starts ranting
and raving about the stupid power company sending us a stupid letter, trying
to make us feel bad.
Sometimes the world is lying. And sometimes you do fall short of your
best.
But when your madwoman ﬂips out in ragey panic, that’s your cue to “turn
and face the strange.” That is, you create observational distance. You calmly
and neutrally explore what’s actually creating this apparent chasm between
you and expected-you. In the case of the power company’s letter, what might
cause your utility usage to be higher than “average”? Do you live in an old
house? Do you work from home, have kids, or charge an electric car? Is your
energy use high because you cook at home a lot, which prevents the higher
environmental impact of fast-food consumption? Are there a lot of small
apartments in your neighborhood, which will deﬁnitely require less energy to
heat, which will lower the local “average”?
“Is there more I can be doing?” you ask yourself. And maybe the answer
is, “I’m already doing all I can,” but maybe sometimes the answer is, “I could
do a little more.” And you don’t have to beat yourself up for not having done
that little bit more before; before, you were doing all you could. You know
that, because you checked in with yourself. You turned and faced the strange.
Everyone’s life is diﬀerent, and we are all doing our best. “Our best” today
may not be “the best there is,” but it’s the best we can do today. Which is
strange. And yet true. And could draw us down into helplessness and isolation
if we don’t stay anchored. And the way we stay anchored is with gratitude.
FACE TH E STRANG E, CH ANG E TH E W O RLD
Jam es Baldw in fam ously said, “Not everything that is faced can
be changed. But nothing can be changed until it is faced.” Less
fam ously, right before he said that, he said, “And furtherm ore,

[PDF page 202]

you give m e a terrifying advantage: You [w hite people] never
had to look at m e. I had to look at you. I know  m ore about you
than you know  about m e.”
Turning to look at the uncom fortable truths, turning to face
the strange, is the terrifying advantage. People on the receiving
end of oppression or violence or the im pacts of clim ate change
don’t have a choice about it. People w ith som e degree of
pow er, privilege, or opportunity have to choose it, the fearful
advantage of know ing w hat is true— all of w hat is true. Even
the parts that highlight the diﬀerence betw een us and
expected-us.
The m adw om an can’t help it. She w ill ip out w henever she
learns about another w ay in w hich the w orld dem ands m ore
from  us than w e’re giving, and she w ill try to m ake it som eone’s
fault— our ow n or the w orld’s. But look w hat happens:
Suppose you’re a w hite person, and a person of color points
out som ething you did that w as, ya know, kind of racist. Your
m adw om an ips out, since the w orld is calling you racist, w hich
is terrible, and you’re a good person w ho w ould never
discrim inate against anyone. If your m adw om an overreacts and
declares the w orld (that is, the person of color w ho confronted
you) a lying asshole and insists nothing is w rong, then you can’t
participate in changing the w orld to m ake it a better, fairer
place. Your reaction is likely to be som ething like “That’s not
what happened! I’m  not a racist!”
If, on the other hand, she overidenties w ith the criticism and
starts w hipping you for being no better than the Klan, calling
you a failure and a fraud, then you’re too im paired by this self-
inicted suﬀering to be able to engage productively. Your
reaction m ay be som ething equally unproductive, like “ALL M Y
W H ITE FEELING S ARE H U RT PLEASE H ELP M E BRO W N PERSO N!”
The m adw om an’s reactive panic is unhelpful as a m otivation
to do anything, but it is great inform ation. First, it tells you
you’re being confronted w ith a diﬀerence betw een you and
expected-you. Second, it tells you that that diﬀerence m atters

[PDF page 203]

to you. So an assessment w ith observational distance m ight be,
“It m atters to m e that I treat everyone fairly, and it sounds like
that’s not w hat happened. I’m  alw ays trying to do better.”
It’s really strange, the experience of “That is not w hat I
m eant to do, and yet that is w hat happened, as far as this new
inform ation is concerned.” It’s really strange w hen w e’re doing
our best, and our best falls short of w hat the w orld expects
from  us. W hen w e can turn tow ard that strangeness w ith
observational distance, then w e are best enabled to be the
change w e w ant to see in the w orld.

[PDF page 204]

How to G row M ighty, Part 3: G ratitude (*Sigh*)
It’s not a self-help book for women without the injunction to “practice
gratitude,” right? You already know “gratitude” is good for you. And every
time someone reminds you to be grateful, maybe there’s a little piece of you
that beats yourself up for forgetting to be grateful.
Gratitude practices really are good for you, but before we discuss them,
let’s mention one caveat: Being grateful for good things doesn’t erase the
diﬃcult things. Women have spent centuries being told to be grateful for how
much better we have it now than we did before. This “gratitude for what you
have” has been used as a weapon against us, to silence our struggle and shame
us for our suﬀering. Gratitude is not about ignoring problems. If anything,
gratitude works by providing tools for the struggle, for further progress. It is
positive reappraisal, concentrated and distilled to its purest essence.20
And forgetting to be grateful is completely normal (because:
headwinds/tailwinds asymmetry), which is why we all need to be reminded.
So how do we do it?
Gratitude practices as they’re generally presented in pop culture—usually
some form of grateful-for-what-you-have exercise, like “Every day, write a
list of ten things you’re grateful for”—don’t cut it, empirically speaking.
When Emily tried this, it always made her feel worse because it just
reminded her of how many people don’t have those things, which made her
feel helpless and inadequate.
Then she read the research herself and followed the instructions of the
evidence-based interventions…and it worked like a charm. There are two
techniques that really get the job done, and neither involves gratitude-for-
what-you-have. The key is practicing gratitude-for-who-you-have and
gratitude-for-how-things-happen.
A Short-Term Quick-Fix Gratitude Boost is gratitude-for-who-you-have.
Mr. Rogers, accepting a Lifetime Achievement Award, asked everyone in the
audience to take ten seconds to remember some of the people who have
“helped you love the good that grows within you, some of those people who

[PDF page 205]

have loved us and wanted what was best for us, […] those who have
encouraged us to become who we are.” That’s how to gratitude-for-who-you-
have.
If you want to go big, write that person a letter expressing how they helped
you.21 You might even want to give it to them. You might even—and this is
only if you want a super-burst of gratitude—read the letter out loud to them.
A “gratitude visit” like this can boost your well-being for a full month, or
even up to three months.22
A Long-Term Gratitude Lifter is gratitude-for-how-things-happen. At the
end of each day, think of some event or circumstance for which you feel
grateful, and write about it:
1. Give the event or circumstance a title, like “Finished Writing
Chapter 8” or “Made It Through That Meeting Without Crying
or Yelling.”
2. Write down what happened, including details about what
anyone involved, including you, did or said.
3. Describe how it made you feel at the time, and how you feel
now, as you think about it.
4. Explain how the event or circumstance came to be. What was
the cause? What conﬂuence of circumstances came together to
create this moment?
If, as you write, you feel yourself being drawn into negative, critical
thoughts and feelings, gently set them to one side and return your attention to
the thing you’re being grateful for.
The research asks people to do this for three events every day, for at least a
week, but Emily couldn’t be bothered to do that much, so she did it for just
one event per day for three weeks. And it was great. It trained her brain to
notice not just the positive events themselves, but also the personal strengths
she leveraged to create them and the external resources that made it
possible.23

[PDF page 206]

Sophie said to us, “So last night I told Bernard about the mean
girls at the department store. And do you know what he said?”
“What did he say?”
“He put on this serious face and said, ‘Your life might have been
as rich as any woman’s, if only…you sweated your butt oﬀ on the
treadmill and wore a size six.’ And I was like, ‘Janice Lester!’ and
he was like, ‘That episode is the worst, right?’ And…”
And she kept talking about how the evening went, and it was
clear to everyone that she had crossed a threshold. Could there be
anything more romantic than a guy who really gets the
madwoman in your attic?
That was a couple years ago. They bought a house together
recently. His kids love her, and she is constantly surprised by how
much she loves them. And whenever Sophie encounters what she
calls “the usual nonsense,” she sends Bernard a text: “JANICE
LESTER!!!!!”
—
This is the last chapter and the culmination of everything we’ve learned so
far, so let’s ask a fundamental question: Why does anything in this book
matter? Does it matter how well we are—that is, how free we are to move
through the cycles and oscillations of being human? If we’re not hurting other
people, does it really matter how exhausted, overwhelmed, and self-critical—
how burned out—we feel?
It does matter. It matters because we, your authors, want the world to be a
better place. We want life to become increasingly good for an increasing
number of people. We think you want that, too. And you are part of the
world.
When you are cruel to yourself, contemptuous and shaming, you only
increase the cruelty in the world; when you are kind and compassionate
toward yourself, you increase the kindness and compassion in the world.
Being compassionate toward yourself—not self-indulgent or self-pitying, but
kind—is both the least you can do and the single most important thing you

[PDF page 207]

can do to make the world a better place. Until you are free, we can’t be fully
free, which is why all of us together have to collaborate to create that
freedom for everyone. Our wellness is tied to yours.
The world does not have to change before we turn toward our internal
experience with kindness and compassion. And when we do, that all by itself
is a revolution. The world is changed when we change, because we are, each
of us—and that includes you—a part of the world. This is our shared home,
and we, Emily and Amelia, are your sisters.
tl;dr:
•We each have a “madwoman” in our psychological attic. She
has the impossible job of managing the chasm between
what we are and what Human Giver Syndrome has told us
to be.
•Self-compassion and gratitude empower us to recognize the
diﬀerence between who we are and who the world expects
us to be, without beating ourselves up or shutting ourselves
oﬀ from the world.
•Self-compassion is hard because healing hurts and growing
stronger can be scary. But it’s worth it because healing helps
us grow mighty enough to heal Human Giver Syndrome.
•We don’t have to wait for the world to change before we
begin to heal ourselves and one another.

[PDF page 208]

CONCLUSION
JOYFULLY EVER AFTER
We wanted to give Burnout an optimistic and empowering “happily ever
after” of an ending, but as we ﬁnished writing this book, we noticed
something strange: our “self-help” book barely mentions happiness.
It turns out we didn’t write a book about “happiness.”
But there’s a diﬀerent word that appears in every chapter:
Joy.
Isn’t joy the same as happiness? Oh, no. As Brittney Cooper writes in
Eloquent Rage, “Happiness is predicated on ‘happenings,’ on what’s occurring,
on whether your life is going right, and whether all is well. Joy arises from an
internal clarity about our purpose.”1 When we engage with something larger
than ourselves, we make meaning; and when we can resonate, bell-like, with
that Something Larger, that’s joy. And because our Something Larger is
within us, no external circumstances can take away our source of joy, no
matter the “happenings” around us.
But it’s more than that.
As we considered what it means to live not “happily ever after,” but
joyfully ever after, we realized one last heretical truth: It doesn’t come “from
within.” It comes from connection with fellow givers.
The stepping stone to joy is feeling like you are “enough,” and feeling “not
enough” is a form of loneliness. We need other people to tell us that we are
enough, not because we don’t know it already, but because the act of hearing
it from someone else—and (equally) the act of taking the time to remind
someone else they’re enough—is part of what makes us feel we’re enough.
We give and we receive, and we are made whole.
It is a normal, healthy condition of humanity, to need other people to
remind us that we can trust ourselves, that we can be as tender and

[PDF page 209]

compassionate with ourselves as we would be, as our best selves, toward any
suﬀering child. To need help feeling “enough” is not a pathology; it is not
“neediness.” It’s as normal as your need to assure the people you love that
they can trust themselves, that they can be as tender and compassionate with
themselves as you would be with them. And this exchange, this connection, is
the springboard from which we launch into a joyful life.
Wellness, once again, is not a state of mind, but a state of action; it is the
freedom to move through the cycles of being human, and this ongoing,
mutual exchange of support is the essential action of wellness. It is the ﬂow of
givers giving and accepting support, in all its many forms.
The cure for burnout is not “self-care”; it is all of us caring for one
another.
So we’ll say it one more time:
Trust your body.
Be kind to yourself.
You are enough, just as you are right now.
Your joy matters.
Please tell everyone you know.
tl;dr:
•Just because you’ve dealt with a stressor doesn’t mean you’ve
dealt with the stress. And you don’t have to wait until all
your stressors are dealt with before you deal with your
stress. Which is to say, you don’t have to wait for the world
to be better before you make your life better—and by
making your life better, you make the world better.
•Wellness is not a state of being but a state of action. It is the
freedom to move ﬂuidly through the cyclical, oscillating
experiences of being human.
•“Human Giver Syndrome” is the contagious false belief that
you have a moral obligation to give every drop of your

[PDF page 210]

humanity—your time, attention, energy, love, even your
body—in support of others, no matter the cost to you. Pay
attention to how diﬀerent it feels to interact with people
who treat you with care and generosity, versus people who
treat you as if they are entitled to whatever they want from
you.
•Humans are not built to function autonomously; we are built
to oscillate from connection to autonomy and back again.
Connection—with friends, family, pets, the divine, etc.—is
as necessary as food and water.

[PDF page 211]

For the givers

[PDF page 212]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Humans are not built to do big things alone; we are built to do them together.
Our names are on the cover, but there are scores of humans without whose
assistance and support this book wouldn’t exist. Here are some of them:
Thanks to our brilliant and delightful literary agent, Lindsay Edgecombe.
She sold this book not once but twice, and never wavered in her conviction
that a “feminist self-help” book was a great and even necessary idea.
Thanks to our spectacular editor, Sara Weiss, who explained the book to
us several times, so that we didn’t lose track of our Something Larger, and
gave us permission to be super-feminist and also feminine.
Thanks to all the women whose lives went into the composite women’s
stories. We hope we’ve done you justice. Thanks to all the people who replied
to our Facebook questions. You proved that it’s possible to have a substantive,
insightful conversation on Facebook—even about intensely emotional topics.
Thanks to Charles Carver for writing about the discrepancy-reducing
feedback loop, among a great deal else, and for talking to Emily on the phone
for an hour. Thanks to Julie Mencher for referring us to Women’s Growth in
Connection, which turned out to be the missing piece of the Burnout puzzle.
Thanks to our husbands, without whom we very literally could not have
written the book, but more speciﬁcally, thanks to Emily’s husband for the
illustrations, and to Amelia’s husband for the music in the audiobook.
We started writing Burnout in 2015 and ﬁnished in 2018. A lot changed
over those years, to put it mildly. #Shepersisted was born in that time, as
were the Trump presidency and Brexit. Hillary Clinton became the ﬁrst
presidential candidate to apologize for losing an election. “Incel” entered the
public vocabulary, while the #MeToo movement became a global

[PDF page 213]

conversation. Maxine Waters reclaimed her time, Emma González called BS,
and Dr. Christine Blasey Ford explained the impact of trauma on memory to
the U.S. Senate judiciary committee.
In short, the world needs a book about women’s survival more now than it
has in decades. Writing the book helped us through these diﬃcult years. We
hope it oﬀers something in return to all these people who enriched this book,
our lives, and the world.

[PDF page 214]

NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1. Freudenberger, “Staﬀ Burn-Out Syndrome.”
2. Hultell, Melin, and Gustavsson, “Getting Personal with Teacher Burnout”; Larrivee, Cultivating
Teacher Renewal.
3. Watts and Robertson, “Burnout in University Teaching Staﬀ”; Cardozo, Crawford, et al.,
“Psychological Distress, Depression.”
4. Blanchard, Truchot, et al., “Prevalence and Causes of Burnout”; Imo, “Burnout and Psychiatric
Morbidity Among Doctors”; Adriaenssens, De Gucht, and Maes, “Determinants and Prevalence
of Burnout in Emergency Nurses”; Moradi, Baradaran, et al., “Prevalence of Burnout in
Residents of Obstetrics and Gynecology”; Shanafelt, Boone, et al., “Burnout and Satisfaction
Among US Physicians.” Another meta-analysis found a range of burnout among ICU
professionals between 0 and 70 percent. Van Mol, Kompanje, et al., “Prevalence of Compassion
Fatigue Among Healthcare Professionals.”
5. Roskam, Raes, and Mikolajczak, “Exhausted Parents.”
6. Purvanova and Muros, “Gender Diﬀerences in Burnout.”
7. I.e., women, but also all femmes and people of color.
8. Manne, Down Girl.
9. Manne, Down Girl, 49.
10. Patashnik, Gerber, and Dowling, Unhealthy Politics.
11. Friedman and Förster, “Eﬀects of Motivational Cues.”

[PDF page 215]

CHAPTER 1: COMPLETE THE CYCLE
1. Hippos kill ﬁve times as many people as lions—about ﬁve hundred people a year—but that’s
nothing compared to humans; we kill a hundred times that many people in a year. Gates,
“Deadliest Animal in the World.”
2. Especially “heart rate variability” (HRV), a measure of how adaptive the cardiovascular system is
in response to changes in stressors. Regarding acute stress: Castaldo, Melillo, et al., “Acute
Mental Stress Assessment.” And regarding chronic stress: Verkuil, Brosschot, et al., “Prolonged
Non-Metabolic Heart Rate Variability Reduction.”
3. For example, Marsland, Walsh, et al., “Eﬀects of Acute Psychological Stress”; Valkanova,
Ebmeier, and Allan, “CRP, IL-6 and Depression”; Morey, Boggero, et al., “Current Directions in
Stress”; and Song, Fang, et al., “Association of Stress-Related Disorders.”
4. Sapolsky, Why Zebras Don’t.
5. Similar but not identical—e.g., brain activation varies depending on the nature of the stressors.
Psychosocial stressors activate brain areas associated with emotion regulation more than
physiological stressors, while physiological stressors activate motor processing more than
psychosocial stressors do. Kogler, Müller, et al., “Psychosocial Versus Physiological Stress.”
6. Soﬁ, Valecchi, et al., “Physical Activity”; Rosenbaum, Tiedemann, et al., “Physical Activity
Interventions”; Samitz, Egger, and Zwahlen, “Domains of Physical Activity.”
7. Epley and Schroeder, “Mistakenly Seeking Solitude.”
8. Sandstrom and Dunn, “Social Interactions and Well-Being.”
9. Bazzini, Stack, et al., “Eﬀect of Reminiscing About Laughter.”
10. Scott, “Why We Laugh.”
11. Grewen, Anderson, et al., “Warm Partner Contact.”
12. Walsh, “Human-Animal Bonds I.”
13. Christian, Westgarth, et al., “Dog Ownership and Physical Activity”; Richards, Ogata, and Cheng,
“Evaluation of the Dogs”; and Keat, Subramaniam, et al., “Review on Beneﬁts of Owning
Companion Dogs.”
14. Delle Fave, Brdar, et al., “Religion, Spirituality, and Well-Being.”
15. Conner, DeYoung, and Silvia, “Everyday Creative Activity.”
16. Amy Speace, a singer-songwriter who works with Bessel van der Kolk.
17. Science proves what mothers know: sighing is a sign of relaxation at the neurological level. Li et
al., “Peptidergic Control Circuit.”

[PDF page 216]

CHAPTER 2: #PERSIST
1. Aldao, Nolen-Hoeksema, and Schweizer, “Emotion-Regulation Strategies.”
2. McRae, Kateri, and Mauss, “Increasing Positive Emotion.”
3. Witvliet, Hofelich Mohr, et al., “Transforming or Restraining Rumination.”
4. We’re deﬁning “optimism” and “pessimism” this way, as a blend of several ways of deﬁning and
assessing them. Typical examples include Seligman’s “explanatory style,” that is, a way of
understanding why things happen in terms of the permanence, pervasiveness, and personalness of
the factors that cause them. Seligman, Learned Optimism. By contrast, Scheier and Carver’s Life
Orientation Test (LOT) assesses a person’s general expectancy of good things or bad things
happening. Scheier and Carver, “Optimism, Coping, and Health.”
5. Diemand-Yauman, Oppenheimer, and Vaughan, “Fortune Favors the Bold.”
6. Mehta, Zhu, and Cheema, “Is Noise Always Bad?”
7. Phillips, “How Diversity Works”; Apfelbaum, Phillips, and Richeson, “Rethinking the Baseline.”
8. It’s called the “Dunning Kruger Eﬀect.” Sapolsky, Behave, chap. 2.
9. Byron, Khazanchi, and Nazarian, “Relationship Between Stressors and Creativity.”
10. Phillips, Liljenquist, and Neale, “Is the Pain Worth the Gain?”
11. McCrea, Liberman, et al., “Construal Level and Procrastination.”
12. Cerasoli, Nicklin, and Ford, “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic Incentives.”
13. Torre and Lieberman, “Putting Feelings into Words”; and Fan, Varamesh, et al., “Does Putting
Your Emotions into Words.”
14. Adams, Watson, et al., “Neuroethology of Decision-Making.”
15. Sharp, John, “Senate Democrats Read.”
16. Withers, Rachel, “8 Women Who Were Warned”; Hatch, “13 Iconic Women Who”; Higgins,
“The 35 Best ‘Nevertheless.’ ”
17. Resources for those looking to dive more deeply into the research on what we call “the Monitor”
but is technically known as the discrepancy-reducing (or -increasing) feedback loop and criterion
velocity: Carver and Scheier, “Feedback Processes in the Simultaneous Regulation of Action and
Eﬀect.” If you’d like to know more about evidence-based strategies for supporting behavior
change, check out Miller and Rollnick, Motivational Interviewing. And if you’d like to read the
biological and computational science of the “exploit/explore problem,” we really valued Ejova,
Navarro, and Perfors, “When to Walk Away,” and, more peripherally, MacLean, Hare, et al.,
“Evolution of Self-Control.”

[PDF page 217]

CHAPTER 3: MEANING
1. A review of all survey instruments and questionnaires that scientists and clinicians use to assess
“meaning in life” concluded that meaning is “a highly individual perception, understanding[,] or
belief about one’s own life and activities and the value and importance ascribed to them.”
Brandstätter, Baumann, et al., “Systematic Review of Meaning.”
2. Seligman, Learned Optimism.
3. Russo-Netzer, Schulenberg, and Batthyany, “Clinical Perspectives on Meaning.” Two-thirds of
the studies done in a systematic review of research on personal recovery from mental illness
found that “meaning in life” was a signiﬁcant factor in recovery. Other crucial factors:
connectedness, hope, identity, and empowerment, giving the acronym CHIME. Leamy, Bird, et
al., “Conceptual Framework for Personal Recovery.”
4. Metz, Thaddeus, “The Meaning of Life.”
5. Ryan and Deci, “On Happiness and Human Potential.”
6. Metz, Thaddeus, “The Meaning of Life.”
7. King, Hicks, et al., “Positive Aﬀect and the Experience.”
8. Steger, “Experiencing Meaning in Life.”
9. Roepke, Jayawickreme, and Riﬄe, “Meaning and Health”; Czekierda, Gancarczyk, and
Luszczynska, “Associations Between Meaning in Life”; Kim, Strecher, and Ryﬀ, “Purpose in Life
and Use.”
10. Roepke, Jayawickreme, and Riﬄe, “Meaning and Health.”
11. Vos, “Working with Meaning in Life.”
12. Guerrero-Torrelles, Monforte-Royo, et al., “Understanding Meaning in Life Interventions.”
13. Park, “Meaning Making Model.”
14. “Meaning is knowing what your highest strengths are—and deploying those in the service of
something you believe is larger than you are.” “Meaning of Life,” Positive Psychology
Foundation.
15. These are condensed from the Personal Meaning Proﬁle’s seven factors of meaning—relationship,
intimacy, religion, achievement, self-transcendence, self-acceptance, and fair treatment—and on
the Meaning Making Model’s self-esteem, aﬃliation, certainty, and symbolic immortality. Heine,
Proulx, and Vohs, “Meaning Maintenance Model.”
16. Of course, there are better and worse Something Largers in terms of their impact on the world—
to pick the low-hanging fruit of examples, Nazis had plenty of meaning in their lives, murdering
millions of people—but the nature of good and evil is outside the scope of this book. If you’re
asking yourself whether your Something Larger is a good one, consider what our own
grandmother told us, which is also what pretty much any major religious ﬁgurehead would say:
“Ask yourself, ‘Are you hurting anyone? Are you helping anyone?’ ”
17. Hart, The Ear of the Heart, 241.
18. Paul and Wong, “Meaning Centered Positive Group Intervention.”

[PDF page 218]

19. Cancer Journals.
20. Clinton, Hillary, Twitter post, September 6, 2016, 4:18 P.M. https://twitter.com/ hillaryclinton/ 
status/ 774024262352941057.
21. Murdock, “The Heroine’s Journey.”
22. Friedan, “Up from the Kitchen Floor.”
23. Martin, “Star Trek’s Uhura Reﬂects.”
24. Park and Baumeister, “Meaning in Life and Adjustment.”
25. Tang, Kelley, et al., “Emotions and Meaning in Life.”
26. Tsai, El-Gabalawy, et al., “Post-Traumatic Growth Among Veterans.”
27. Calhoun, et al., “Relationships between Posttraumatic Growth and Resilience.”
28. White, Maps of Narrative Practice, and e.g., Vromans and Schweitzer, “Narrative Therapy for
Adults.” For depression: Weber, Davis, and McPhie, “Narrative Therapy, Eating Disorders.” For
disordered eating: Adler, “Living into the Story.”
29. Gwozdziewycz and Mehl-Madrona, “Meta-Analysis of Narrative Exposure Therapy.”
30. Fisher, Everlasting Name. But see also Howe, “I Believe in the Sun,” for history and other
translations.

[PDF page 219]

CHAPTER 4: THE GAME IS RIGGED
1. Saha, Eikenburg, et al.,”Repeated Forced Swim Stress.”
2. Seligman, Learned Optimism.
3. Douthat, “Redistribution of Sex.”
4. From July 2016 through August 2018. The Santa Fe, Texas, high school shooting, the Ed’s Car
Wash shooting, the Marathon Savings Bank shooting, and possibly the Marjory Stoneman
Douglas High School shooting were all apparently motivated, at least in part, by jealousy of or
rejection by a woman. The Capital Gazette shooting involved the perpetrator’s resentment of the
newspaper’s coverage of his guilty plea to harassment of a woman. Berkowitz, Lu, and Alcantara,
“Terrible Numbers That Grow.”
5. “Guns and Domestic Violence,” Everytown for Gun Safety. Mass shootings are a tiny but highly
visible fraction of deaths by gun violence, but they parallel other gun violence, which is
disproportionately perpetrated by men and occurs in the context of domestic and intimate partner
violence.
6. Krebs, Lindquist, et al., Campus Sexual Assault (CSA) Study.
7. Fulu, Warner, et al., “Why Do Some Men Use Violence Against Women.”
8. Sadker and Sadker, Failing at Fairness, 269.
9. Karpowitz, Mendelberg, and Shaker, “Gender Inequality in Deliberative Participation.”
10. Dalla, Antoniou, et al., “Chronic Mild Stress Impact.”
11. Friedan, Feminine Mystique.
12. See “Balancing Paid Work, Unpaid Work, and Leisure,” OECD.
13. Altintas and Sullivan, “Fifty Years of Change Updated.”
14. “Women Shoulder Responsibility,” Oﬃce for National Statistics.
15. R v R [1992] 1 A.C. 599, House of Lords.
16. Davidai and Gilovich, “Headwinds/Tailwinds Asymmetry.”
17. Files, Mayer, et al., “Speaker Introductions at Internal Medicine.”
18. “A new study conﬁrms it: You likely experienced that moment of awkwardness or disrespect
because you are a woman.” Accessed December 7, 2018. https://www.facebook.com/ NPR/ posts/ 
10155647100291756.
19. Lepore and Revenson, “Relationships Between Posttraumatic Growth.”
20. “The Counted: People Killed by Police in the U.S.”
21. van Dernoot Lipsky, Trauma Stewardship, chap. 4.
22. See Appendix B: Standards of Self-Care Gudelines; Mathieu, Compassion Fatigue Workbook.

[PDF page 220]

CHAPTER 5: THE BIKINI INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX
1. Dohnt and Tiggemann, “Body Image Concerns.”
2. Evans, Tovée, et al., “Body Dissatisfaction and Disordered Eating Attitudes.”
3. Vander Wal, “Unhealthy Weight Control Behaviors.”
4. Becker, “Television, Disordered Eating, and Young Women.”
5. “Thick Dumpling Skin”; Cusio, “ ‘Eat Up.’ ”
6. “Taking Surprising Risks For The Ideal Body.” Accessed December 7, 2018. http://www.npr.org/ 
templates/ story/ story.php?storyId=124700865.
7. Permanent Market Research, “Global Nutrition and Supplements Market.”
8. Ernsberger and Koletsky, “Weight Cycling.”
9. Risk of all-cause mortality by BMI for women and men, data from Lancet table e7 in the
supplementary materials, http://www.thelancet.com/ cms/ attachment/ 2074019615/ 2068888322/ 
mmc1.pdf. Unlabeled data points and error values on the graph are as follows:
10. Keith, Fontaine, and Allison, “Mortality Rate and Overweight”; Di Angelantonio, Shilpa,
Bhupathiraju, et al., “Body-Mass Index and All-Cause Mortality.”
11. Keith, Fontaine, and Allison, “Mortality Rate and Overweight.”
12. Park, Wilkens, et al., “Weight Change in Older Adults.”
13. Calogero, Tylka, and Mensinger, “Scientiﬁc Weightism.”
14. Feinman, Pogozelski, et al., “Dietary Carbohydrate Restriction.”
15. Schatz and Ornstein, Athlete.
16. Collazo-Clavell and Lopez-Jimenez, “Accuracy of Body Mass Index.”
17. Saguy, What’s Wrong with Fat?
18. If you’d like a full account of the political manipulations by the Bikini Industrial Complex that
created a world where “healthy weight” means “the lowest weight you can still be healthy” instead
of “a wide range indicating general good health,” check out Bacon, Health at Every Size, or, for
nerds, her peer-reviewed academic journal article with Aphramor, “Weight Science.”
19. “Why People Hate Tess Munster,” Militant Baker.
20. Brown, “These Women Were Fat-Shamed”; Kolata, “Shame of Fat Shaming”; Engber, “Glutton
Intolerance”; Chapman, Kaatz, and Carnes, “Physicians and Implicit Bias”; Puhl and Heuer,

[PDF page 221]

“Obesity Stigma.”
21. Le Grange, Swanson, et al., “Eating Disorder Not Otherwise Speciﬁed.” “Every 62 minutes at
least one person dies as a direct result from an eating disorder.” “Eating Disorder Statistics.”
ANAD.
22. Furnham, Badmin, and Sneade, “Body Image Dissatisfaction”; Kilpatrick, Hebert, and
Bartholomew, “College Students’ Motivation for Physical Activity.”
23. Dittmar, Halliwell, and Ive, “Does Barbie Make Girls Want to Be Thin?”
24. Puhl, Andreyeva, and Brownell, “Perceptions of Weight Discrimination”; Fikkan and Rothblum,
“Is Fat a Feminist Issue?”
25. Table 205, “Cumulative Percent Distribution of Population by Height and Sex, 2007 to 2008,”
https://www2.census.gov/ library/ publications/ 2010/ compendia/ statab/ 130ed/ tables/ 11s0205.pdf;
Lee and Pausé, “Stigma in Practice.”
26. Farrell, Fat Shame, 145.
27. Ibid.
28. Ibid.
29. Recent examples of this increasingly substantial conclusion: A 2013 meta-analysis found that
various diet and exercise regimens could, on average, sustain weight loss of eight pounds over
eighteen months: Johansson, Neovius, and Hemmingsson, “Eﬀects of Anti-Obesity Drugs.” A
2014 meta-analysis of the eﬀect of exercise on weight loss found that physical activity sustained
weight loss of ﬁve pounds over twelve months: Swift, Johannsen, et al., “Role of Exercise and
Physical.”
30. For example, the Be Body Positive Model oﬀers ﬁve competencies for healing your relationship
with your body: (1) Reclaim health, by centering your well-being—physical, emotional, social—
and shifting “weight” and “body shape” to the periphery. (2) Practice intuitive self-care, by
listening to your body and attending to your body’s need, without trying to control or regulate
those needs. (3) Cultivate self-love, by practicing self-compassion, or, as Be Body Positive
founder Connie Sobczak puts it, “cultivate mercy for your impermanent and ever-changing body.”
(4) Declare your own authentic beauty, by shifting your deﬁnition of beauty from the culturally
deﬁned standard to “a dynamic, engaged relationship with the world around us.” “Declare Your
Own Authentic Beauty,” TheBodyPositive. You can practice with their online gallery at
thisisbeauty.org, where you’ll ﬁnd not just photos, but videos, stories, and poems. And ﬁnally, (5)
Build community, surrounding yourself with people who support you in these ideas. You can read
an entire book on the Be Body Positive Model, embody, by Connie Sobczak. Health at Every Size
(HAES®), similarly, has four principles: Accept your size, trust yourself, adopt healthy lifestyle
habits, and embrace size diversity, welcoming the reality that people vary in their size and shape,
just as they vary in their race and sexual orientation. “Open to the beauty found across the
spectrum,” says the HAES manifesto. Bacon, Health at Every Size, 274. The Body Project, too,
aims to reduce internalization of the “thin ideal” and body self-criticism, and to teach skills of
interrupting “fat talk” and “body talk” conversations that reinforce the thin ideal and body self-
criticism. Stice and Presnell, Body Project.
31. For a book all about full-on loving your body, see Taylor, Body Is Not an Apology.
32. This sense of your own internal experience is interoception. Craig, “How Do You Feel?”

[PDF page 222]



[PDF page 223]

CHAPTER 6: CONNECT
1. Bakwin, “Loneliness in Infants.”
2. Cacioppo and Patrick, Loneliness, chap. 6; Gangestad and Grebe, “Hormonal Systems, Human
Social Bonding, and Aﬃliation.”
3. Holt-Lunstad, “Social Relationships and Mortality Risk: A Meta-analytic Review.”
4. Polack, “New CIGNA Study Reveals Loneliness.”
5. Prime Minister’s Oﬃce. “PM Commits to Government-wide Drive.”
6. Hari, Sams, and Nummenmaa, “Attending To and Neglecting People,” 20150365.
7. Golland, Arzouan, and Levit-Binnun, “The Mere Co-presence.”
8. Cacioppo, Zhou, et al., “You Are in Sync with Me.”
9. Goleman, Social Intelligence, 4.
10. Gerhardt, Why Love Matters.
11. Connection is so fundamental to the nature of being human, so essential to our development, that
some scientists argue the socially connected mind is the true “default mode.” Hari, Henriksson, et
al., “Centrality of Social Interaction.”
12. Baumeister and Leary, “Need to Belong”; Malone, Pillow, and Osman, “General Belongingness
Scale.”
13. Cacioppo and Hawkley, “Loneliness”; Leary, Kelly, et al., “Construct Validity”; Gooding,
Winston, et al., “Individual Diﬀerences in Hedonic Experience.”
14. Nichols and Webster, “Single-Item Need to Belong Scale”; Gardner, Pickett, et al., “On the
Outside Looking In”; Kanai, Bahrami, et al., “Brain Structure Links Loneliness”; Beekman,
Stock, and Marcus, “Need to Belong, Not Rejection Sensitivity.”
15. Robles, Slatcher, et al., “Marital Quality and Health.”
16. Coan and Sbarra, “Social Baseline Theory.” The authors observe, “To the human brain, social and
metabolic resources are treated almost interchangeably.”
17. Gottman, Science of Trust, chap. 6.
18. Ibid., chap. 10.
19. Robinson, Lopez, et al., “Authenticity, Social Context, and Well-Being.”
20. Ibid.
21. Clinchy, “Connected and Separate Knowing.”
22. Ryan and David, “Gender Diﬀerences in Ways of Knowing.”
23. Valdesolo, Ouyang, and DeSteno, “Rhythm of Joint Action.”
24. Cirelli, Einarson, and Trainor, “Interpersonal Synchrony Increases.”
25. McNeill, Keeping Together in Time: Dance and Drill in Human History.

[PDF page 224]

CHAPTER 7: W HAT MAKES YOU STRONGER
1. Tyler and Burns, “After Depletion.”
2. Hagger, Wood, et al., “Ego Depletion and the Strength Model”; Solberg Nes, Ehlers, et al., “Self-
regulatory Fatigue, Quality of Life.”
3. Tyler and Burns, “After Depletion.”
4. Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli and Ford, “Default Mode Network Activity.”
5. Domhoﬀ and Fox, “Dreaming and the Default Network.”
6. Brodesser-Akner, “Even the World’s Top Life.”
7. Andrews-Hanna, Smallwood, and Spreng, “Default Network and Self-Generated Thought.”
8. Immordino-Yang, Christodoulou, and Singh, “Rest Is Not Idleness.”
9. Wilson, Reinhard, et al., “Just Think.”
10. Danckert and Merriﬁeld, “Boredom, Sustained Attention.”
11. Bailey, Smart Exercise.
12. Nowack, “Sleep, Emotional Intelligence.”
13. Troxel, “It’s More Than Sex”; Troxel, Buysse, et al., “Marital Happiness and Sleep Disturbances.”
14. Wilson, Jaremka, et al., “Shortened Sleep Fuels Inﬂammatory Responses.”
15. “Senate Report on CIA Torture: Sleep Deprivation.”
16. Everson, Bergmann, and Rechtschaﬀen, “Sleep Deprivation in the Rat, III.” This has never been
proven experimentally in humans, for obvious ethical reasons; sleep deprivation is, after all, a
form of torture, and has been for centuries. Rejali, Torture and Democracy.
17. Itani, Jike, et al., “Short Sleep Duration and Health Outcomes”; de Mello, Narciso, et al., “Sleep
Disorders as a Cause.”
18. Meng, Zheng, and Hui, “Relationship of Sleep Duration”; Lee, Ng, and Chin, “Impact of Sleep
Amount”; Soﬁ, Cesari, et al., “Insomnia and Risk of Cardiovascular Disease”; Xi, He, et al.,
“Short Sleep Duration Predicts”; Lin, Chen, et al., “Night-Shift Work Increases Morbidity.”
19. Anothaisintawee, Reutrakul, et al., “Sleep Disturbances Compared to Traditional Risk.”
20. Kerkhof and Van Dongen, “Eﬀects of Sleep Deprivation”; Fortier-Brochu, Beaulieu-Bonneau, et
al., “Insomnia and Daytime Cognitive”; Durmer and Dinges, “Neurocognitive Consequences of
Sleep Deprivation”; Ma, Dinges, et al., “How Acute Total Sleep Loss.”
21. Williamson and Feyer, “Moderate Sleep Deprivation Produces.”
22. Harrison and Horne, “Impact of Sleep Deprivation on Decision”; Barnes and Hollenbeck, “Sleep
Deprivation and Decision-Making”; Byrne, Dionisi, et al., “Depleted Leader”; Christian and Ellis,
“Examining the Eﬀects of Sleep Deprivation.”
23. Baglioni, Battagliese, et al., “Insomnia as a Predictor of Depression”; Sivertsen, Salo, et al.,
“Bidirectional Association”; Lovato and Gradisar, “Meta-Analysis and Model.”

[PDF page 225]

24. Pigeon, Pinquart, and Conner, “Meta-Analysis of Sleep Disturbance.”
25. Spiegelhalder, Regen, et al., “Comorbid Sleep Disorders”; Pires, Bezerra, et al., “Eﬀects of Acute
Sleep Deprivation.”
26. Kessler, “Epidemiology of Women and Depression”; de Girolamo, et al., “Prevalence of Common
Mental Disorders in Italy”; Faravelli, et al., “Gender diﬀerences in depression and anxiety: the
role of age.”
27. Liu, Xu, et al., “Sleep Duration and Risk”; Shen, Wu, and Zhang, “Nighttime Sleep Duration”;
Cappuccio, D’Elia, et al., “Sleep Duration and All-Cause.” There was also around a 30 percent
greater risk among those who slept more than nine or ten hours, but many more people are
sleeping too little than too much. In one study, 28 percent of American women slept six hours or
less, compared with just 9 percent sleeping nine or more hours. Krueger and Friedman, “Sleep
Duration in the United States.”
28. Fatigue is immensely complicated, from a biological point of view, involving “[a] wide array of
immune, inﬂammatory, oxidative and nitrosative stress (O&NS), bioenergetic, and
neurophysiological abnormalities,” and hypersomnia can be a symptom of any number of medical
issues: Morris, Berk, et al., “Neuro-Immune Pathophysiology.” Long sleep is more closely linked
to inﬂammation than short sleep: Irwin, Olmstead, and Carroll, “Sleep Disturbance, Sleep
Duration.” And long sleep is associated with a 45 percent increase in ten-year risk for stroke: Lee,
Ng, and Chin, “Impact of Sleep Amount.” It predicts almost all of the health issues associated
with short sleep: Jike, Itani, et al.,”Long Sleep Duration.” Seriously, if you’re sleeping this much
and don’t feel rested, talk to a medical provider.
29. Cappuccio, D’Elia, et al., “Sleep Duration and All-Cause.”
30. Klug, “Dangerous Doze.”
31. Ekirch, “The modernization of western sleep.”
32. Hegarty, “Myth of the Eight-Hour.”
33. Dzaja, Arber, et al., “Women’s Sleep.”
34. Burgard, “Needs of Others”; Burgard and Ailshire, “Gender and Time for Sleep.”
35. Lane, Liang, et al., “Genome-Wide Association Analyses.”
36. People’s lives and needs vary, so this is just an illustration. All numbers are from the American
Time Use Survey, https://www.bls.gov/ tus/ .
37. “Average Commute Times,” WNYC; McGregor, “Average Work Week.”
38. American Time Use Survey, https://www.bls.gov/ tus/ tables/ a1_2015.pdf. Women in 2015
reported, on average, 0.22 of an hour per day on “participating in sports, exercise, and recreation”
and 2.56 hours watching television.”
39. Gottman and Silver, The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work.
40. Walker, Why We Sleep.
41. Pang, Rest: Why You Get More Done When You Work Less.

[PDF page 226]

CHAPTER 8: GROW  MIGHTY
1. Gubar and Gilbert, The Madwoman in the Attic.
2. McIntosh, Feeling Like a Fraud.
3. Poehler, Yes Please, 16.
4. Whelton and Greenberg, “Emotion in Self-Criticism.”
5. Stairs, “Clarifying the Construct.”
6. Sirois, Kitner, and Hirsch, “Self-Compassion, Aﬀect.”
7. MacBeth and Gumley, “Exploring Compassion.”
8. Pace, Negi, et al., “Eﬀect of Compassion Meditation.”
9. Davis, Ho, et al., “Forgiving the Self”; Macaskill, “Diﬀerentiating Dispositional Self-
Forgiveness”; da Silva, Witvliet, and Riek, “Self-Forgiveness and Forgiveness-Seeking.”
10. Neﬀ and Germer, “Pilot Study.”
11. Stuewig and McCloskey, “Relation of Child Maltreatment.”
12. Gilbert, McEwan, et al., “Fears of Compassion.”
13. Mayhew and Gilbert, “Compassionate Mind Training.”
14. Clinchy, “Connected and Separate Knowing.”
15. For example: “unblending” in Internal Family Systems: Earley, “Self-Therapy.” Or “defusing” in
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: Hayes, Luoma, et al., “Acceptance and Commitment
Therapy.” Or the “empty chair” strategy of Emotion Focused Therapy: Kannan and Levitt,
“Review of Client Self-criticism.” It’s also similar to “decentering”: Fresco, Moore, et al., “Initial
Psychometric Properties” and to “self-distancing”: Ayduk and Kross, “From a Distance.”
16. Diedrich, Grant, et al., “Self-Compassion as an Emotion.”
17. Gilbert and Procter, “Compassionate Mind Training”; Gilbert, “Introducing Compassion-Focused
Therapy.”
18. Gu, Strauss, et al., “How Do Mindfulness-Based Cognitive”; van der Velden, Maj, Kuyken, et al.,
“Systematic Review of Mechanisms”; Alsubaie, Abbott, et al.,”Mechanisms of Action.”
19. Ayres, Raseman, and Shih, “Evidence from Two Large Field Experiments.”
20. Lambert, Fincham, and Stillman, “Gratitude and Depressive Symptoms.”
21. Toepfer, Cichy, and Peters, “Letters of Gratitude.”
22. Gander, Proyer, et al., “Strength-Based Positive Interventions.”
23. This is the most eﬀective of the positive psychology interventions. Bolier, Haverman, et al.,
“Positive Psychology Interventions.”

[PDF page 227]

CONCLUSION: JOYFULLY EVER AFTER
1. Cooper, Eloquent Rage, 274.

[PDF page 228]

REFERENCES
“Average Commute Times.” WNYC, n.d., https://project.wnyc.org/ commute-times-us/ embed.html.
“Balancing Paid Work, Unpaid Work, and Leisure.” OECD, n.d., http://www.oecd.org/ gender/ data/ 
balancingpaidworkunpaidworkandleisure.htm.
“Declare Your Own Authentic Beauty.” TheBodyPositive, n.d., http://smedelstein.com/ creative/ bp/ 
authentic-beauty.htm.
“Eating Disorder Statistics.” ANAD, n.d., http://www.anad.org/ education-and-awareness/ about-eating-
disorders/ eating-disorders-statistics/.
“Guns and Domestic Violence.” Everytown for Gun Safety, n.d., https://everytownresearch.org/ wp-
content/ uploads/ 2017/ 01/ Guns-and-Domestic-Violence-04.04.18.pdf.
“Relationship Between Posttraumatic Growth and Resilience: Recovery, Resistance, and
Reconﬁguration.” In Handbook of Posttraumatic Growth: Research and Practice, ed. Lawrence G.
Calhoun and Richard G. Tedeschi. Routledge, 2014.
“Senate Report on CIA Torture: Sleep Deprivation.” Human Rights First, n.d.,
https://www.humanrightsﬁrst.org/ senate-report-cia-torture/ sleep-deprivation.
“The Counted: People Killed by Police in the U.S.” Guardian, n.d., https://www.theguardian.com/ us-
news/ series/ counted-us-police-killings.
“The Meaning of Life—The M in PERMA.” Positive Psychology Foundation, May 28, 2011,
http://www.positivepsyc.com/ blog/ the-meaning-of-life-the-m-in-perma.
“Thick Dumpling Skin.” March 27, 2017, http://www.thickdumplingskin.com.
“Why People Hate Tess Munster (And Other Happy Fat People).” Militant Baker, January 28, 2015,
http://www.themilitantbaker.com/ 2015/ 01/ why-people-hate-tess-munster-and-other.html.
“Women Shoulder the Responsibility of ‘Unpaid Work.’ ” Oﬃce for National Statistics (UK),
November 10, 2016, https://visual.ons.gov.uk/ the-value-of-your-unpaid-work/.
Adams, Geoﬀrey K., Karli K. Watson, et al. “Neuroethology of Decision-Making.” Current Opinion in
Neurobiology 22, no. 6 (2012): 982–89.

[PDF page 229]

Adler, Jonathan M. “Living into the Story: Agency and Coherence in a Longitudinal Study of Narrative
Identity Development and Mental Health over the Course of Psychotherapy.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 102, no. 2 (2012).
Adriaenssens, Jef, Véronique De Gucht, and Stan Maes. “Determinants and Prevalence of Burnout in
Emergency Nurses: A Systematic Review of 25 Years of Research.” International Journal of Nursing
Studies 52, no. 2 (2015): 649–61.
Aldao, Amelia, Susan Nolen-Hoeksema, and Susanne Schweizer. “Emotion-Regulation Strategies
Across Psychopathology: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Clinical Psychology Review 30, no. 2 (2010): 217–
37.
Alsubaie, Modi, Rebecca Abbott, et al. “Mechanisms of Action in Mindfulness-Based Cognitive
Therapy (MBCT) and Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) in People with Physical and/or
Psychological Conditions: A Systematic Review.” Clinical Psychology Review 55 (2017): 74–91.
Altintas, Evrim, and Oriel Sullivan. “Fifty Years of Change Updated: Cross-National Gender
Convergence in Housework.” Demographic Research 35 (2016).
American Time Use Survey. “Time Spent in Detailed Primary Activities and Percent of the Civilian
Population Engaging in Each Activity, Averages Per Day By Sex, 2015 Annual Averages.” Bureau of
Labor Statistics, https://www.bls.gov/ tus/ tables/ a1_2015.pdf.
Andrews-Hanna, Jessica R., Jonathan Smallwood, and R. Nathan Spreng. “The Default Network and
Self-Generated Thought: Component Processes, Dynamic Control, and Clinical Relevance.” Annals of
the New York Academy of Sciences 1316, no. 1 (2014): 29–52.
Anothaisintawee, Thunyarat, Sirimon Reutrakul, et al. “Sleep Disturbances Compared to Traditional
Risk Factors for Diabetes Development: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Sleep Medicine
Reviews 30 (2016): 11–24.
Apfelbaum, Evan P., Katherine W. Phillips, and Jennifer A. Richeson. “Rethinking the Baseline in
Diversity Research: Should We Be Explaining the Eﬀects of Homogeneity?” Perspectives on
Psychological Science 9, no. 3 (2014): 235–44.
Aphramor, Lucy. “Weight Science: Evaluating the Evidence for a Paradigm Shift.” Nutrition Journal 10
(2011).
Ayduk, Ö zlem, and Ethan Kross. “From a Distance: Implications of Spontaneous Self-Distancing for
Adaptive Self-Reﬂection.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 98, no. 5 (2010).
Ayres, Ian, Sophie Raseman, and Alice Shih. “Evidence from Two Large Field Experiments That Peer
Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage.” Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization 29 (2009).
Bacon, Linda. Health at Every Size. BenBella, 2010.

[PDF page 230]

Baglioni, Chiara, Gemma Battagliese, et al. “Insomnia as a Predictor of Depression: A Meta-Analytic
Evaluation of Longitudinal Epidemiological Studies.” Journal of Aﬀective Disorders 135, no. 1 (2011):
10–19.
Bailey, Covert. Smart Exercise: Burning Fat, Getting Fit. Houghton Miﬄin, 1994.
Bakwin, Harry. “Loneliness in Infants.” American Journal of Diseases of Children 63, no. 1 (1942): 30–
40.
Barnes, Christopher M., and John R. Hollenbeck. “Sleep Deprivation and Decision-Making Teams:
Burning the Midnight Oil or Playing with Fire?” Academy of Management Review 34, no. 1 (2009):
56–66.
Baumeister, Roy F., and Mark R. Leary. “The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as
a Fundamental Human Motivation.” Psychological Bulletin 117, no. 3 (1995).
Bazzini, D. G., E. R. Stack, et al. “The Eﬀect of Reminiscing About Laughter on Relationship
Satisfaction.” Motivation and Emotion 31 (2007).
Becker, Anne E. “Television, Disordered Eating, and Young Women in Fiji: Negotiating Body Image
and Identity During Rapid Social Change.” Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 28, no. 4 (2004): 533–59.
Beekman, Janine B., Michelle L. Stock, and Tara Marcus. “Need to Belong, Not Rejection Sensitivity,
Moderates Cortisol Response, Self-Reported Stress, and Negative Aﬀect Following Social Exclusion.”
Journal of Social Psychology 156, no. 2 (2016): 131–38.
Berkowitz, Bonnie, Denise Lu, and Chris Alcantara. “The Terrible Numbers That Grow with Each
Mass Shooting.” Washington Post, March 22, 2017.
Blanchard, P., D. Truchot, et al. “Prevalence and Causes of Burnout Amongst Oncology Residents: A
Comprehensive Nationwide Cross-Sectional Study.” European Journal of Cancer 46, no. 15 (2010):
2708–15.
Bolier, Linda, Merel Haverman, et al. “Positive Psychology Interventions: A Meta-Analysis of
Randomized Controlled Studies.” BMC Public Health 13, no. 1 (2013).
Brandstätter, Monika, Urs Baumann, et al. “Systematic Review of Meaning in Life Assessment
Instruments.” Psycho-Oncology 21, no. 10 (2012): 1034–52.
Brodesser-Akner, Taﬀy. “Even the World’s Top Life Coaches Need a Life Coach. Meet Martha Beck.”
Bloomberg, May 18, 2016.
Brown, Harriet. “These Women Were Fat-Shamed by Their Doctors—And It Almost Cost Them Their
Lives.” Prevention, October 29, 2015.

[PDF page 231]

Burgard, Sarah A. “The Needs of Others: Gender and Sleep Interruptions for Caregivers.” Social Forces
89, no. 4 (2011): 1189–1215.
Burgard, Sarah A., and Jennifer A. Ailshire. “Gender and Time for Sleep Among US Adults.”
American Sociological Review 78, no. 1 (2013): 51–69.
Byrne, Alyson, Angela M. Dionisi, et al. “The Depleted Leader: The Inﬂuence of Leaders’ Diminished
Psychological Resources on Leadership Behaviors.” Leadership Quarterly 25, no. 2 (2014): 344–57.
Byron, Kristin, Shalini Khazanchi, and Deborah Nazarian. “The Relationship Between Stressors and
Creativity: A Meta-Analysis Examining Competing Theoretical Models.” Journal of Applied
Psychology 95, no. 1 (2010).
Cacioppo, J. T., and L. C. Hawkley. “Loneliness.” in Handbook of Individual Diﬀerences in Social
Behavior, ed. M. R. Leary and R. H. Hoyle. Guilford Press, 2009.
Cacioppo, John T., and William Patrick. Loneliness: Human Nature and the Need for Social Connection.
Norton, 2008.
Cacioppo, Stephanie, Haotian Zhou, et al. “You Are in Sync with Me: Neural Correlates of
Interpersonal Synchrony with a Partner.” Neuroscience 277 (2014): 842–58.
Calhoun, Lawrence G., and Richard G. Tedeschi, “Relationships between Posttraumatic Growth and
Resilience: Recovery, Resistance, and Reconﬁguration.” Handbook of Posttraumatic Growth: Research
and Practice.
Calogero, Rachel M., Tracy L. Tylka, and Janell L. Mensinger. “Scientiﬁc Weightism: A View of
Mainstream Weight Stigma Research Through a Feminist Lens.” In Feminist Perspectives on Building a
Better Psychological Science of Gender, ed. T. A. Roberts, N. Curtin, et al. Springer International
Publishing, 2016.
Cancer Journals: Special Edition. San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, 1997.
Cappuccio, Francesco P., Lanfranco D’Elia, et al. “Sleep Duration and All-Cause Mortality: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Prospective Studies.” Sleep 33, no. 5 (2010).
Cardozo, Barbara Lopes, Carol Gotway Crawford, et al. “Psychological Distress, Depression, Anxiety,
and Burnout Among International Humanitarian Aid Workers: A Longitudinal Study.” PLOS One 7, no.
9 (2012).
Carver, Charles S., and Michael F. Scheier. “Feedback Processes in the Simultaneous Regulation of
Action and Aﬀect.” Handbook of Motivation Science, ed. Guilford Press, 2008.
Castaldo, Rossana, Paolo Melillo, et al. “Acute Mental Stress Assessment via Short Term HRV Analysis
in Healthy Adults: A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis.” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control
18 (2015): 370–77.

[PDF page 232]

Cerasoli, Christopher P., Jessica M. Nicklin, and Michael T. Ford. “Intrinsic Motivation and Extrinsic
Incentives Jointly Predict Performance: A 40-Year Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 140, no. 4
(2014).
Chapman, Elizabeth N., Anna Kaatz, and Molly Carnes. “Physicians and Implicit Bias: How Doctors
May Unwittingly Perpetuate Health Care Disparities.” Journal of General Internal Medicine 28, no. 11
(2013): 1504–10.
Christian, Hayley E., Carri Westgarth, et al. “Dog Ownership and Physical Activity: A Review of the
Evidence.” Journal of Physical Activity and Health 10, no. 13 (2013): 750–59.
Christian, Michael S., and Aleksander P. J. Ellis. “Examining the Eﬀects of Sleep Deprivation on
Workplace Deviance: A Self-Regulatory Perspective.” Academy of Management Journal 54, no. 5
(2011): 913–34.
Cirelli, L. K., K. M. Einarson, et al. “Interpersonal Synchrony Increases Prosocial Behavior in Infants.”
Developmental Science 17 (2014): 1003–11.
Clinchy, Blythe McVicker. “Connected and Separate Knowing: Toward a Marriage of True Minds.” In
Knowledge, Diﬀerence, and Power: Essays Inspired by “Women’s Ways of Knowing.” Basic Books, 1996.
Coan, James A., and Davie A. Sbarra. “Social Baseline Theory: The Social Regulation of Risk and
Eﬀort.” Current Opinion in Psychology 1 (2015): 87–91.
Collazo-Clavell, M. L., and F. Lopez-Jimenez. “Accuracy of Body Mass Index to Diagnose Obesity in
the US Adult Population.” International Journal of Obesity 32, no. 6 (2008): 959–66.
Conner, Tamlin S., Colin G. DeYoung, and Paul J. Silvia. “Everyday Creative Activity as a Path to
Flourishing.” Journal of Positive Psychology (2016): 1–9.
Cooper, Brittney. Eloquent Rage: A Black Feminist Discovers Her Superpower. St. Martin’s Press, 2018.
Craig, Arthur D. “How Do You Feel? Interoception: The Sense of the Physiological Condition of the
Body.” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3, no. 8 (2002).
Cusio, Carmen. “ ‘Eat Up’: How Cultural Messages Can Lead to Eating Disorders.” NPR, December 7,
2015.
Czekierda, K., A. Gancarczyk, and A. Luszczynska. “Associations Between Meaning in Life and Health
Indicators: A Systematic Review.” European Health Psychologist 16 Supp. (2014).
da Silva, Sérgio P., Charlotte vanOyen Witvliet, and Blake Riek. “Self-Forgiveness and Forgiveness-
Seeking in Response to Rumination: Cardiac and Emotional Responses of Transgressors.” Journal of
Positive Psychology 12, no. 4 (2017): 362–72.

[PDF page 233]

Dalla, C., K. Antoniou, et al. “Chronic Mild Stress Impact: Are Females More Vulnerable?”
Neuroscience 135, no. 3 (2005): 703–14.
Danckert, Jame, and Colleen Merriﬁeld. “Boredom, Sustained Attention and the Default Mode
Network.” Experimental Brain Research (2016): 1–12.
Davidai, Shai, and Thomas Gilovich. “The Headwinds/Tailwinds Asymmetry: An Availability Bias in
Assessments of Barriers and Blessings.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 111, no. 6
(2016).
Davis, Don E., Man Yee Ho, et al. “Forgiving the Self and Physical and Mental Health Correlates: A
Meta-Analytic Review.” Journal of Counseling Psychology 62, no. 2 (2015).
de Girolamo, G., G. Polidori, P. Morosini, et al. “Prevalence of Common Mental Disorders in Italy.”
Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 41 (11) (2006): 853–61.
de Mello, Marco Tullio, Veruska Narciso, et al. “Sleep Disorders as a Cause of Motor Vehicle
Collisions.” International Journal of Preventive Medicine 4, no. 3 (2013).
Delle Fave, Antonella, Ingrid Brdar, et al. “Religion, Spirituality, and Well-Being Across Nations: The
Eudaemonic and Hedonic Happiness Investigation.” In Well-Being and Cultures. Springer Netherlands,
2013.
Di Angelantonio, Emanuele Shilpa, N. Bhupathiraju, et al. “Body-Mass Index and All-Cause Mortality:
Individual-Participant-Data Meta-Analysis of 239 Prospective Studies in Four Continents.” Lancet 388,
no. 10046 (2016): 776–86.
Diedrich, Alice, Michaela Grant, et al. “Self-Compassion as an Emotion Regulation Strategy in Major
Depressive Disorder.” Behaviour Research and Therapy 58 (July 2014): 43–51.
Diemand-Yauman, Connor, Daniel M. Oppenheimer, and Erikka B. Vaughan. “Fortune Favors the
Bold (And the Italicized): Eﬀects of Disﬂuency on Educational Outcomes.” Cognition 118, no. 1
(2011): 111–15.
Dittmar, Helga, Emma Halliwell, and Suzanne Ive. “Does Barbie Make Girls Want to Be Thin? The
Eﬀect of Experimental Exposure to Images of Dolls on the Body Image of 5- to 8-Year-Old Girls.”
Developmental Psychology 42, no. 2 (2006).
Dohnt, Hayley K., and Marika Tiggemann. “Body Image Concerns in Young Girls: The Role of Peers
and Media Prior to Adolescence.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 35, no. 2 (2006): 135–45.
Domhoﬀ, G. William, and Kieran C. R. Fox. “Dreaming and the Default Network: A Review,
Synthesis, and Counterintuitive Research Proposal.” Consciousness and Cognition 33 (2015): 342–53.
Douthat, Ross. “The Redistribution of Sex.” New York Times, May 2, 2018.

[PDF page 234]

Durmer, Jeﬀrey S., and David F. Dinges. “Neurocognitive Consequences of Sleep Deprivation.”
Seminars in Neurology 25, no. 01: 117–29.
Dzaja, Andrea, Sara Arber, et al. “Women’s Sleep in Health and Disease.” Journal of Psychiatric
Research 39, no. 1 (2005): 55–76.
Earley, Jay. “Self-Therapy: A Step-by-Step Guide to Creating Wholeness and Healing Your Inner Child
Using Ifs, a New Cutting-Edge Psychotherapy.” Pattern System Books, 2009.
Ejova, Anastasia, Daniel Navarro, and A. Perfors. “When to Walk Away: The Eﬀect of Variability on
Keeping Options Viable.” Cognitive Science Society, 2009.
Ekirch, A. Roger. “The modernization of western sleep: Or, does sleep insomnia have a history?” Past
& Present 226, no. 1 (2015): 149–152.
Engber, Daniel. “Glutton Intolerance: What If a War on Obesity Only Makes the Problem Worse?”
Slate, October 5, 2009.
Epley, Nicholas, and Juliana Schroeder. “Mistakenly Seeking Solitude.” Journal of Experimental
Psychology 143, no. 5 (2014).
Ernsberger, Paul, and Richard J. Koletsky. “Weight Cycling.” JAMA 273, no. 13 (1995): 998–99.
Evans, Elizabeth H., Martin J. Tovée, et al. “Body Dissatisfaction and Disordered Eating Attitudes in 7-
to-11-Year-Old Girls: Testing a Sociocultural Model.” Body Image 10, no. 1 (2013): 8–15.
Everson, Carol A., Bernard M. Bergmann, and Allan Rechtschaﬀen. “Sleep Deprivation in the Rat, III:
Total Sleep Deprivation.” Sleep 12, no. 1 (1989): 13–21.
Fan, Rui, Ali Varamesh, et al. “Does Putting Your Emotions into Words Make You Feel Better?
Measuring the Minute-Scale Dynamics of Emotions from Online Data.” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.09725 (2018).
Farrell, Amy Erdman. Fat Shame: Stigma and the Fat Body in American Culture. NYU Press, 2011.
Faravelli, C., M. Alessandra Scarpato, G. Castellini, et al. “Gender diﬀerences in depression and
anxiety: the role of age.” Psychiatry Research, (2013): 1301–3.
Feinman, Richard D., Wendy K. Pogozelski, et al. “Dietary Carbohydrate Restriction as the First
Approach in Diabetes Management: Critical Review and Evidence Base.” Nutrition 31, no. 1 (2015):
1–13.
Fikkan, Janna L., and Esther D. Rothblum. “Is Fat a Feminist Issue? Exploring the Gendered Nature of
Weight Bias.” Sex Roles 66, no. 9–10 (2012): 575–92.

[PDF page 235]

Files, Julia A., Anita P. Mayer, et al. “Speaker Introductions at Internal Medicine Grand Rounds:
Forms of Address Reveal Gender Bias.” Journal of Women’s Health 26, no. 5 (2017): 413–19.
Fisher, Adam. An Everlasting Name: A Service for Remembering the Shoah. Behrman House, 1991.
Fortier-Brochu, Émilie, Simon Beaulieu-Bonneau, et al. “Insomnia and Daytime Cognitive
Performance: A Meta-Analysis.” Sleep Medicine Reviews 16, no. 1 (2012): 83–94.
Fresco, David M., Michael T. Moore, et al. “Initial Psychometric Properties of the Experiences
Questionnaire: Validation of a Self-Report Measure of Decentering.” Behavior Therapy 38, no. 3
(2007): 234–46.
Freudenberger, Herbert J. “The Staﬀ Burn-Out Syndrome in Alternative Institutions.” Psychotherapy
Theory Research and Practice 12 (January 1975): 73–82.
Friedan, Betty. The Feminine Mystique. Norton, 1963.
Friedan, Betty. “Up from the Kitchen Floor.” New York Times, March 4, 1973.
Friedman, Ronald S., and Jens Förster. “Eﬀects of Motivational Cues on Perceptual Asymmetry:
Implications for Creativity and Analytical Problem Solving.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 88, no. 2 (2005): 263–75.
Fulu, Emma, Xian Warner, et al. “Why Do Some Men Use Violence Against Women and How Can
We Prevent It?” In Quantitative Findings from the United Nations Multi-Country Study on Men and
Violence in Asia and the Paciﬁc. Bangkok: United Nations Development Programme, 2013.
Furnham, Adrian, Nicola Badmin, and Ian Sneade. “Body Image Dissatisfaction: Gender Diﬀerences in
Eating Attitudes, Self-Esteem, and Reasons for Exercise.” Journal of Psychology 136, no. 6 (2002):
581–96.
Gander, Fabian, René T. Proyer, et al. “Strength-Based Positive Interventions: Further Evidence for
Their Potential in Enhancing Well-Being and Alleviating Depression.” Journal of Happiness Studies 14,
no. 4 (2013): 1241–59.
Gangestad, Steven W., and Nicholas M. Grebe. “Hormonal Systems, Human Social Bonding, and
Aﬃliation.” Hormones and Behavior 91 (2017): 122–35.
Gardner, Wendi L., Cynthia L. Pickett, et al. “On the Outside Looking In: Loneliness and Social
Monitoring.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 31, no. 11 (2005): 1549–60.
Gates, Bill. “The Deadliest Animal in the World.” GatesNotes (blog), April 25, 2014,
https://www.gatesnotes.com/ Health/ Most-Lethal-Animal-Mosquito-Week.
Gerhardt, Sue. Why Love Matters: How Aﬀection Shapes a Baby’s Brain. Routledge, 2004.

[PDF page 236]

Gilbert, P., K. McEwan, et al. “Fears of Compassion: Development of Three Self-Report Measures.”
Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice 84 (2011): 239–55.
Gilbert, Paul. “Introducing Compassion-Focused Therapy.” Advances in Psychiatric Treatment 15, no. 3
(May 2009): 199–208.
Gilbert, Paul, and Sue Procter. “Compassionate Mind Training for People with High Shame and Self-
Criticism: Overview and Pilot Study of a Group Therapy Approach.” Clinical Psychology and
Psychotherapy 13, no. 6 (2006): 353–79.
Goleman, Daniel. Social Intelligence. Random House, 2007.
Golland, Yulia, Yossi Arzouan, and Nava Levit-Binnun. “The Mere Co-presence: Synchronization of
Autonomic Signals and Emotional Responses Across Co-Present Individuals Not Engaged in Direct
Interaction.” PLOS ONE 10, no. 5 (2015).
Gooding, Diane C., Tina M. Winston, et al. “Individual Diﬀerences in Hedonic Experience: Further
Evidence for the Construct Validity of the ACIPS.” Psychiatry Research 229, no. 1 (2015): 524–32.
Gottman, John M. The Science of Trust: Emotional Attunement for Couples. Norton, 2011.
Gottman, John, and Nan Silver. The Seven Principles for Making Marriage Work: A Practical Guide
from the Country’s Foremost Relationship Expert. Harmony Books, 2015.
Grewen, K. M., B. J. Anderson, et al. “Warm Partner Contact Is Related to Lower Cardiovascular
Reactivity.” Behavioral Medicine 29 (2003): 123–30.
Gu, Jenny, Clara Strauss, et al. “How Do Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy and Mindfulness-
Based Stress Reduction Improve Mental Health and Wellbeing? A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis of Mediation Studies.” Clinical Psychology Review 37 (2015): 1–12.
Gubar, Susan, and Sandra Gilbert. The Madwoman in the Attic. Yale University Press, 1979.
Guerrero-Torrelles, Mariona, Cristina Monforte-Royo, et al. “Understanding Meaning in Life
Interventions in Patients with Advanced Disease: A Systematic Review and Realist Synthesis.”
Palliative Medicine (2017): 0269216316685235.
Gwozdziewycz, Nicolas, and Lewis Mehl-Madrona. “Meta-Analysis of the Use of Narrative Exposure
Therapy for the Eﬀects of Trauma Among Refugee Populations.” Permanente Journal 17, no. 1 (2013):
70–76.
Hagger, Martin S., Chantelle Wood, et al. “Ego Depletion and the Strength Model of Self-Control: A
Meta-Analysis.” Psychological Bulletin 136, no. 4 (2010): 495–525.
Hari, Riitta, Linda Henriksson, et al. “Centrality of Social Interaction in Human Brain Function.”
Neuron 88, no. 1 (2015): 181–93.

[PDF page 237]

Hari, Riitta, Mikko Sams, and Lauri Nummenmaa. “Attending To and Neglecting People: Bridging
Neuroscience, Psychology and Sociology.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences 371 (May 5, 2016): 20150365.
Harrison, Yvonne, and James A. Horne. “The Impact of Sleep Deprivation on Decision Making: A
Review.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 6, no. 3 (2000): 236–49.
Hart, Dolores. The Ear of the Heart. Ignatius Press, 2013.
Hatch, Jenavieve. “13 Iconic Women Who Nevertheless Persisted.” Huﬃngton Post, February 21, 2017.
Hayes, Steven C., Jason B. Luoma, et al. “Acceptance and Commitment Therapy: Model, Processes and
Outcomes.” Behaviour Research and Therapy 44, no. 1 (2006): 1–25.
Hegarty, Stephanie. “The Myth of the Eight-Hour Sleep.” BBC News Magazine, February 22, 2012.
Heine, S. J., T. Proulx, and K. D. Vohs. “The Meaning Maintenance Model: On the Coherence of
Social Motivations.”Personality and Social Psychology Review 10 (2006): 88–110.
Herrera, Tim. “Work Less. You’ll Get So Much More Done.” New York Times, June 26, 2017.
Higgins, Marissa. “The 35 Best ‘Nevertheless, She Persisted’ Tweets, Becaues This Moment Is Nothing
Short of Iconic.” Bustle, February 8, 2017, https://www.bustle.com/ p/the-35-best-nevertheless-she-
persisted-tweets-because-this-moment-is-nothing-short-of-iconic-36697.
Holt-Lunstad, Julianne, Timothy B. Smith, J. Bradley Layton. “Social Relationships and Mortality
Risk: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Public Library of Science Medicine.
Howe, Everett. “I Believe in the Sun, Part II: The Friend.” Humanist Seminarian, March 25, 2017,
https://humanistseminarian.com/ 2017/ 03/ 25/ i-believe-in-the-sun-part-ii-the-friend/ .
Hultell, Daniel, Bo Melin, and J. Petter Gustavsson. “Getting Personal with Teacher Burnout: A
Longitudinal Study on the Development of Burnout Using a Person-Based Approach.” Teaching and
Teacher Education 32 (2013): 75–86.
Immordino-Yang, Mary Helen, Joanna A. Christodoulou, and Vanessa Singh. “Rest Is Not Idleness:
Implications of the Brain’s Default Mode for Human Development and Education.” Perspectives on
Psychological Science 7, no. 4 (2012): 352–64.
Imo, Udemezue O. “Burnout and Psychiatric Morbidity Among Doctors in the UK: A Systematic
Literature Review of Prevalence and Associated Factors.” BJPsych Bulletin 41, no. 4 (2017): 197–204.
Irwin, Michael R., Richard Olmstead, and Judith E. Carroll. “Sleep Disturbance, Sleep Duration, and
Inﬂammation: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies and Experimental Sleep
Deprivation.” Biological Psychiatry 80, no. 1 (2016): 40–52.

[PDF page 238]

Itani, Osamu, Maki Jike, et al. “Short Sleep Duration and Health Outcomes: A Systematic Review,
Meta-Analysis, and Meta-Regression.” Sleep Medicine 32 (2017): 246–56.
Jike, Maki, Osamu Itani, et al. “Long Sleep Duration and Health Outcomes: A Systematic Review,
Meta-Analysis and Meta-Regression.” Sleep Medicine Reviews 39, (2018): 25–36.
Johansson, K., M. Neovius, and E. Hemmingsson. “Eﬀects of Anti-Obesity Drugs, Diet, and Exercise
on Weight-Loss Maintenance After a Very-Low-Calorie Diet or Low-Calorie Diet: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
99, no. 1 (2014): 14–23.
Kanai, Ryota, Bahador Bahrami, et al. “Brain Structure Links Loneliness to Social Perception.” Current
Biology 22, no. 20 (2012): 1975–79.
Kannan, Divya, and Heidi M. Levitt. “A Review of Client Self-criticism in Psychotherapy.” Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration 23, no. 2 (2013): 166–178.
Karpowitz, Christopher F., Tali Mendelberg, and Lee Shaker. “Gender Inequality in Deliberative
Participation.” American Political Science Review, available on CJO doi:10.1017/ S0003055412000329.
Keat, Kung Choon, Ponnusamy Subramaniam, et al. “Review on Beneﬁts of Owning Companion Dogs
Among Older Adults.” Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences 7, no. 4 (2016): 397–405.
Keith, S. W., K. R. Fontaine, and D. B. Allison. “Mortality Rate and Overweight: Overblown or
Underestimated? A Commentary on a Recent Meta-Analysis of the Associations of BMI and
Mortality.” Molecular Metabolism 2, no. 2 (2013): 65–68.
Kerkhof, G. A., and H. P. A. Van Dongen. “Eﬀects of Sleep Deprivation on Cognition.” Human Sleep
and Cognition: Basic Research 185 (2010): 105–129.
Kessler, R. C. “Epidemiology of Women and Depression.” Journal of Aﬀective Disorders 74(1) (2003):
5–13.
Kilpatrick, Marcus, Edward Hebert, and John Bartholomew. “College Students’ Motivation for Physical
Activity: Diﬀerentiating Men’s and Women’s Motives for Sport Participation and Exercise.” Journal of
American College Health 54, no. 2 (2005): 87–94.
Kim, Eric S., Victor J. Strecher, and Carol D. Ryﬀ. “Purpose in Life and Use of Preventive Health
Care Services.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, no. 46 (2014): 16331–36.
King, Laura A., Joshua A. Hicks, et al. “Positive Aﬀect and the Experience of Meaning in Life.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 90, no. 1 (2006): 179–196.
Kitchen Sisters. “Taking Surprising Risks for the Ideal Body.” NPR, March 22, 2010.

[PDF page 239]

Klug, G. “Dangerous Doze: Sleep and Vulnerability in Medieval German Literature.” In Worlds of
Sleep, ed. L. Brunt and B. Steger. Berlin: Frank & Timme, 2008.
Kogler, Lydia, Veronika I. Müller, et al. “Psychosocial Versus Physiological Stress—Meta-Analyses on
Deactivations and Activations of the Neural Correlates of Stress Reactions.” Neuroimage 119 (2015):
235–51.
Kolata, Gina. “The Shame of Fat Shaming.” New York Times, October 1, 2016.
Krebs, C., C. Lindquist, et al. The Campus Sexual Assault (CSA) Study (2007), http://www.ncjrs.gov/ 
pdﬃles1/ nij/ grants/ 221153.pdf.
Krueger, Patrick M., and Elliot M. Friedman. “Sleep Duration in the United States: A Cross-Sectional
Population-Based Study.” American Journal of Epidemiology 169, no. 9 (2009): 1052–63.
Lambert, Nathaniel M., Frank D. Fincham, and Tyler F. Stillman. “Gratitude and Depressive
Symptoms: The Role of Positive Reframing and Positive Emotion.” Cognition and Emotion 26, no. 4
(2012): 615–33.
Lane, Jacqueline M., Jingjing Liang, et al. “Genome-Wide Association Analyses of Sleep Disturbance
Traits Identify New Loci and Highlight Shared Genetics with Neuropsychiatric and Metabolic Traits.”
Nature Genetics 49, no. 2 (2017): 274–281.
Larrivee, Barbara. Cultivating Teacher Renewal: Guarding Against Stress and Burnout. R&L Education,
2012.
Le Grange, Daniel, Sonja A. Swanson, et al. “Eating Disorder Not Otherwise Speciﬁed Presentation in
the US Population.” International Journal of Eating Disorders 45, no. 5 (2012): 711–18.
Leamy, Mary, Victoria Bird, et al. “Conceptual Framework for Personal Recovery in Mental Health:
Systematic Review and Narrative Synthesis.” British Journal of Psychiatry 199, no. 6 (2011): 445–52.
Leary, Mark R., Kristine M. Kelly, et al. “Construct Validity of the Need to Belong Scale: Mapping the
Nomological Network.” Journal of Personality Assessment 95, no. 6 (2013): 610–24.
Lee, Jennifer A., and Cat J. Pausé. “Stigma in Practice: Barriers to Health for Fat Women.” Frontiers in
Psychology 7 (2016): 2063.
Lee, Shaun Wen Huey, Khuen Yen Ng, and Weng Khong Chin. “The Impact of Sleep Amount and
Sleep Quality on Glycemic Control in Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.”
Sleep Medicine Reviews 31 (2017): 91–101.
Lepore, Stephen, and Tracy Revenson. “Relationships Between Posttraumatic Growth and Resilience:
Recovery, Resistance, and Reconﬁguration.” In Handbook of Posttraumatic Growth: Research and
Practice, ed. Lawrence G. Calhoun and Richard G. Tedeschi. Routledge, 2014.

[PDF page 240]

Li, Peng, et al. “The Peptidergic Control Circuit for Sighing.” Nature 530 (February 2016): 293–97.
Lin, Xiaoti, Weiyu Chen, et al. “Night-Shift Work Increases Morbidity of Breast Cancer and All-Cause
Mortality: A Meta-Analysis of 16 Prospective Cohort Studies.” Sleep Medicine 16, no. 11 (2015):
1381–87.
Liu, Tong-Zu, Chang Xu, et al. “Sleep Duration and Risk of All-Cause Mortality: A Flexible, Non-
Linear, Meta-Regression of 40 Prospective Cohort Studies.” Sleep Medicine Reviews 32 (2016): 28–36.
Lombrozo, Tania. “Think Your Credentials Are Ignored Because You’re A Woman? It Could Be.”
NPR.org.
Lovato, Nicole, and Michael Gradisar. “A Meta-Analysis and Model of the Relationship Between Sleep
and Depression in Adolescents: Recommendations for Future Research and Clinical Practice.” Sleep
Medicine Reviews 18, no. 6 (2014): 521–29.
Ma, Ning, David F. Dinges, et al. “How Acute Total Sleep Loss Aﬀects the Attending Brain: A Meta-
Analysis of Neuroimaging Studies.” Sleep 38, no. 2 (2015): 233–40.
Macaskill, Ann. “Diﬀerentiating Dispositional Self-Forgiveness from Other-Forgiveness: Associations
with Mental Health and Life Satisfaction.” Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 31, no. 1 (2012):
28–50.
MacBeth, Angus, and Andrew Gumley. “Exploring Compassion: A Meta-Analysis of the Association
Between Self-Compassion and Psychopathology.” Clinical Psychology Review 32, no. 6 (2012): 545–
52.
MacLean, Evan L., Brian Hare, et al. “The Evolution of Self-Control.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 111, no. 20 (2014): E2140–E2148.
Malone, Glenn P., David R. Pillow, and Augustine Osman. “The General Belongingness Scale (GBS):
Assessing Achieved Belongingness.” Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 52, no. 3 (2012): 311–16.
Manne, Kate. Down Girl: The Logic of Misogyny. Oxford University Press, 2017.
Marsland, Anna L., Catherine Walsh, et al. “The Eﬀects of Acute Psychological Stress on Circulating
and Stimulated Inﬂammatory Markers: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Brain, Behavior, and
Immunity 21, no. 7, (2017): 901–912.
Martin, Michel. “Star Trek’s Uhura Reﬂects on MLK Encounter.” NPR, January 17, 2011.
Mathieu, Françoise. The Compassion Fatigue Workbook: Creative Tools for Transforming Compassion
Fatigue and Vicarious Traumatization. Routledge, 2012.
Mayhew, Sophie L., and Paul Gilbert. “Compassionate Mind Training with People Who Hear
Malevolent Voices: A Case Series Report.” Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy 15, no. 2 (2008):

[PDF page 241]

113–38.
McCrea, Sean M., Nira Liberman, et al. “Construal Level and Procrastination.” Psychological Science
19, no. 12 (2008): 1308–14.
McGregor, Jena. “The Average Work Week Is Now 47 Hours.” Washington Post, September 2, 2014.
McIntosh, Peggy. Feeling Like a Fraud: Part Two. Stone Center, Wellesley College, 1985.
McNeill, William H., Keeping Together in Time: Dance and Drill in Human History, Harvard University
Press, 1997.
McRae, Kateri, and Iris B. Mauss. “Increasing Positive Emotion in Negative Contexts: Emotional
Consequences, Neural Correlates, and Implications for Resilience.” Positive Neuroscience (2016): 159–
174.
Mehta, Ravi, Rui Juliet Zhu, and Amar Cheema. “Is Noise Always Bad? Exploring the Eﬀects of
Ambient Noise on Creative Cognition.” Journal of Consumer Research 39, no. 4 (2012): 784–99.
Meng, Lin, Yang Zheng, and Rutai Hui. “The Relationship of Sleep Duration and Insomnia to Risk of
Hypertension Incidence: A Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies.” Hypertension Research 36,
no. 11 (2013): 985.
Metz, Thaddeus. “The Meaning of Life.” The Standard Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013
Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), https://plato.stanford.edu/ archives/ sum2013/ entries/ life-meaning.
Miller, William R., and Stephen Rollnick. Motivational Interviewing: Helping People Change. Guilford
Press, 2012.
Moradi, Yousef, Hamid Reza Baradaran, et al. “Prevalence of Burnout in Residents of Obstetrics and
Gynecology: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Medical Journal of the Islamic Republic of Iran
29, no. 4 (2015): 235.
Morey, Jennifer N., Ian A. Boggero, et al. “Current Directions in Stress and Human Immune
Function.” Current Opinion in Psychology 5 (2015): 13–17.
Morris, Gerwyn, Michael Berk, et al. “The Neuro-Immune Pathophysiology of Central and Peripheral
Fatigue in Systemic Immune-Inﬂammatory and Neuro-Immune Diseases.” Molecular Neurobiology 53,
no. 2 (2016): 1195–1219.
Murdock, Maureen. “The Heroine’s Journey.” MaureenMurdock.com, n.d., https://link.springer.com/ 
referenceworkentry/ 10.1007 %2F978-3-642-27771-9_200123-1.
Neﬀ, Kristin D., and Christopher K. Germer. “A Pilot Study and Randomized Controlled Trial of the
Mindful Self-Compassion Program.” Journal of Clinical Psychology 69, no. 1 (2013): 28–44.

[PDF page 242]

Nichols, Austin Lee, and Gregory D. Webster. “The Single-Item Need to Belong Scale.” Personality
and Individual Diﬀerences 55, no. 2 (2013): 189–92.
Nowack, Kenneth. “Sleep, Emotional Intelligence, and Interpersonal Eﬀectiveness: Natural
Bedfellows.” Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research 69, no. 2 (2017): 66–79.
Pace, T. W., L. T. Negi, et al. “Eﬀect of Compassion Meditation on Neuroendocrine, Innate Immune
and Behavioral Responses to Psychosocial Stress.” Psychoneuroendocrinology 34 (2009): 87–98.
Pang, Alex. Rest: Why You Get More Done When You Work Less. Basic Books, 2016.
Park, Crystal L. “The Meaning Making Model: A Framework for Understanding Meaning, Spirituality,
and Stress-Related Growth in Health Psychology.” European Health Psychologist 15, no. 2 (2013): 40–
47.
Park, Jina, and Roy F. Baumeister. “Meaning in Life and Adjustment to Daily Stressors.” Journal of
Positive Psychology 12, no. 4 (2017): 333–41.
Park, Song-Yi, Lynne R. Wilkens, et al. “Weight Change in Older Adults and Mortality: The
Multiethnic Cohort Study.” International Journal of Obesity 42, no. 2 (2018): 205–212.
Patashnik, Erik M., Alan S. Gerber, and Conor M. Dowling. Unhealthy Politics: The Battle Over
Evidence-Based Medicine. Princeton University Press, 2017.
Paul, T., and P. Wong. “Meaning Centered Positive Group Intervention.” In Clinical Perspectives on
Meaning. Springer International, 2016.
Permanent Market Research. “Global Nutrition and Supplements Market: History, Industry Growth,
and Future Trends by PMR.” GlobeNewsWire.com, January 27, 2015, https://globenewswire.com/ 
news-release/ 2015/ 01/ 27/ 700276/ 10117198/ en/ Global-Nutrition-and-Supplements-Market-History-
Industry-Growth-and-Future-Trends-by-PMR.html.
Phillips, Katherine W. “How Diversity Works.” Scientiﬁc American 311, no. 4 (2014): 42–47.
Phillips, Katherine W., Katie A. Liljenquist, and Margaret A. Neale. “Is the Pain Worth the Gain? The
Advantages and Liabilities of Agreeing with Socially Distinct Newcomers.” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin 35, no. 3 (2009): 336–50.
Pigeon, Wilfred R., Martin Pinquart, and Kenneth Conner. “Meta-Analysis of Sleep Disturbance and
Suicidal Thoughts and Behaviors.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 73, no. 9 (2012): 1160–67.
Pires, Gabriel Natan, Andreia Gomes Bezerra, et al. “Eﬀects of Acute Sleep Deprivation on State
Anxiety Levels: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Sleep Medicine 24 (2016): 109–18.
Poehler, Amy. Yes Please. Dey Street, 2014.

[PDF page 243]

Polack, Ellie. “New CIGNA Study Reveals Loneliness at Epidemic Levels in America.” CIGNA, May
1, 2018, https://www.cigna.com/ newsroom/ news-releases/ 2018/ new-cigna-study-reveals-loneliness-at-
epidemic-levels-in-america.
Prime Minister’s Oﬃce. “PM Commits to Government-wide Drive to Tackle Loneliness,” Gov.uk,
January 17, 2018, https://www.gov.uk/ government/ news/ pm-commits-to-government-wide-drive-to-
tackle-loneliness.
Puhl, Rebecca M., and Chelsea A. Heuer. “Obesity Stigma: Important Considerations for Public
Health.” American Journal of Public Health 100, no. 6 (2010): 1019–28.
Puhl, Rebecca M., Tatiana Andreyeva, and Kelly D. Brownell. “Perceptions of Weight Discrimination:
Prevalence and Comparison to Race and Gender Discrimination in America.” International Journal of
Obesity 32, no. 6 (2008): 992–1000.
Purvanova, Radostina K., and John P. Muros. “Gender Diﬀerences in Burnout: A Meta-Analysis.”
Journal of Vocational Behavior 77, no. 2 (2010): 168–85.
Rejali, Darius. Torture and Democracy. Princeton University Press, 2009.
Richards, Elizabeth A., Niwako Ogata, and Ching-Wei Cheng. “Evaluation of the Dogs, Physical
Activity, and Walking (Dogs PAW) Intervention: A Randomized Controlled Trial.” Nursing Research
65, no. 3 (2016): 191–201.
Robinson, Oliver C., Frederick G. Lopez, et al. “Authenticity, Social Context, and Well-Being in the
United States, England, and Russia: A Three Country Comparative Analysis.” Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology 44, no. 5 (2013): 719–37.
Robles, Theodore F., Richard B. Slatcher, et al. “Marital Quality and Health: A Meta-Analytic
Review.” Psychological Bulletin 140, no. 1 (2014): 140–187.
Roepke, Ann Marie, Eranda Jayawickreme, and Olivia M. Riﬄe. “Meaning and Health: A Systematic
Review.” Applied Research in Quality of Life 9, no. 4 (2014): 1055–79.
Rosenbaum, Simon, Anne Tiedemann, Catherine Sherrington, Jackie Curtis, and Philip B. Ward.
“Physical Activity Interventions for People with Mental Illness: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Analysis.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 75, no. 9 (2014): 964–74.
Roskam, Isabelle, Marie-Emilie Raes, and Moïra Mikolajczak. “Exhausted Parents: Development and
Preliminary Validation of the Parental Burnout Inventory.” Frontiers in Psychology 8 (2017): 163.
Russo-Netzer, Pninit, Stefan E. Schulenberg, and Alexander Batthyany. “Clinical Perspectives on
Meaning: Understanding, Coping and Thriving Through Science and Practice.” In Clinical Perspectives
on Meaning. Springer International Publishing, 2016.

[PDF page 244]

Ryan, Michelle K., and Barbara David. “Gender Diﬀerences in Ways of Knowing: The Context
Dependence of the Attitudes Toward Thinking and Learning Survey.” Sex Roles 49, no. 11-12 (2003):
693–99.
Ryan, Richard M., and Edward L. Deci. “On Happiness and Human Potentials: A Review of Research
on Hedonic and Eudaimonic Well-Being.” Annual Review of Psychology 52, no. 1 (2001): 141–66.
Sadker, Myra, and David Sadker. Failing at Fairness: How America’s Schools Cheat Girls. Simon &
Schuster, 2010.
Saguy, Abigail C. What’s Wrong with Fat? Oxford University Press, 2012.
Saha, Kaustuv, Douglas Eikenburg, et al. “Repeated Forced Swim Stress Induces Learned Helplessness
in Rats.” FASEB Journal 26, no. 1 supp. (2012): 1042–48.
Samitz, Guenther, Matthias Egger, and Marcel Zwahlen. “Domains of Physical Activity and All-Cause
Mortality: Systematic Review and Dose-Response Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies.” International
Journal of Epidemiology 40, no. 5 (2011): 1382–1400.
Sandstrom, Gillian M., and Elizabeth W. Dunn. “Social Interactions and Well-Being: The Surprising
Power of Weak Ties.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 40, no. 7 (2014): 910–22.
Sapolsky, Robert. Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst. Penguin, 2017.
Sapolsky, Robert. Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers. Holt, 2004.
Schatz, Howard, and Beverly Ornstein. Athlete. Harper Collins, 2002.
Scheier, Michael F., and Charles S. Carver. “Optimism, Coping, and Health: Assessment and
Implications of Generalized Outcome Expectancies.” Health Psychology 4, no. 3 (1985): 219.
Scott, Sophie. “Why We Laugh.” TED: Ideas Worth Spreading, March 2015, https://www.ted.com/ 
talks/ sophie_scott_why_we_laugh?language=en.
Seligman, Martin E. P. Learned Optimism: How to Change Your Mind and Your Life. Vintage, 2006.
Shanafelt, Tait D., Sonja Boone, et al. “Burnout and Satisfaction with Work-Life Balance Among US
Physicians Relative to the General US Population.” Archives of Internal Medicine 172, no. 18 (2012):
1377–85.
Sharp, John. “Senate Democrats Read Coretta Scott King Letter in Opposition to Jeﬀ Sessions.”
Alabama.com, February. 8, 2017, https://www.al.com/ news/ mobile/ index.ssf/ 2017/ 02/ 
senate_democrats_read_coretta.html.
Shen, Xiaoli, Yili Wu, and Dongfeng Zhang. “Nighttime Sleep Duration, 24-Hour Sleep Duration and
Risk of All-Cause Mortality Among Adults: A Meta-Analysis of Prospective Cohort Studies.” Scientiﬁc

[PDF page 245]

Reports 6 (2016).
Sirois, Fuschia M., Ryan Kitner, and Jameson K. Hirsch. “Self-compassion, Aﬀect, and Health-
Promoting Behaviors.” Health Psychology 34, no. 6 (2015): 661.
Sivertsen, Børge, Paula Salo, et al. “The Bidirectional Association Between Depression and Insomnia:
The HUNT Study.” Psychosomatic Medicine 74, no. 7 (2012): 758–65.
Sobczak, Connie. Embody: Learning to Love Your Unique Body (and quiet that critical voice!). Gurze
Books, 2014.
Soﬁ, Francesco, D. Valecchi, et al. “Physical Activity and Risk of Cognitive Decline: A Meta-Analysis
of Prospective Studies.” Journal of Internal Medicine 269, no. 1 (2011): 107–17.
Soﬁ, Francesco, Francesca Cesari, et al. “Insomnia and Risk of Cardiovascular Disease: A Meta-
Analysis.” European Journal of Preventive Cardiology 21, no. 1 (2014): 57–64.
Solberg Nes, Lise, Shawna L. Ehlers, et al. “Self-regulatory Fatigue, Quality of Life, Health Behaviors,
and Coping in Patients with Hematologic Malignancies.” Annals of Behavioral Medicine 48, no. 3
(2014): 411–23.
Song, Huan, Fang Fang, et al. “Association of Stress-Related Disorders with Subsequent Autoimmune
Disease.” JAMA 319, no. 23 (2018): 2388–400.
Spiegelhalder, Kai, Wolfram Regen, et al. “Comorbid Sleep Disorders in Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Across the Life Cycle.” Current Psychiatry Reports 15, no. 6 (2013): 1–6.
Stairs, Agnes M., Gregory T. Smith, et al. “Clarifying the Construct of Perfectionism.” Assessment 19,
no. 2 (2012): 146–66.
Steakley, Lia. “Promoting Healthy Eating and a Positive Body Image on College Campuses.” Scope,
Stanford Medicine, May 29, 2014, https://stan.md/ 2xwwbyw.
Steger, Michael F. “Experiencing Meaning in Life.” In The Human Quest for Meaning: Theories,
Research, and Applications. Routledge, 2012.
Stice, Eric, and Katherine Presnell. The Body Project: Promoting Body Acceptance and Preventing
Eating Disorders. Oxford University Press, 2007.
Stuewig, J., and L. A. McCloskey. “The Relation of Child Maltreatment to Shame and Guilt Among
Adolescents: Psychological Routes to Depression and Deliquency.” Child Maltreatment 10 (2005): 324–
36.
Swift, D. L., N. M. Johannsen, et al. “The Role of Exercise and Physical Activity in Weight Loss and
Maintenance.” Progress in Cardiovascular Disease 56, no. 4 ( 2014): 441–47.

[PDF page 246]

Tang, David, Nicholas J. Kelley, et al. “Emotions and Meaning in Life: A Motivational Perspective.” In
The Experience of Meaning in Life. Springer Netherlands, 2013.
Taylor, Sonya Renee. The Body Is Not an Apology: The Power of Radical Self-Love. Berrett-Koehler,
2018.
Toepfer, Steven M., Kelly Cichy, and Patti Peters. “Letters of Gratitude: Further Evidence for Author
Beneﬁts.” Journal of Happiness Studies 13, no. 1 (2012): 187–201.
Torre, Jared B., and Matthew D. Lieberman. “Putting Feelings into Words: Aﬀect Labeling as Implicit
Emotion Regulation.” Emotion Review 10, no. 2 (2018): 116–24.
Troxel, Wendy M. “It’s More Than Sex: Exploring the Dyadic Nature of Sleep and Implications for
Health.” Psychosomatic Medicine 72, no. 6 (2010): 578.
Troxel, Wendy M., Daniel J. Buysse, et al. “Marital Happiness and Sleep Disturbances in a Multi-
ethnic Sample of Middle-Aged Women.” Behavioral Sleep Medicine 7, no. 1 (2009): 2–19.
Tsai, J., R. El-Gabalawy, et al. “Post-traumatic Growth Among Veterans in the USA: Results from the
National Health and Resilience in Veterans Study.” Psychological Medicine 45, no. 01 (2015): 165–79.
Tyler, James M., and Kathleen C. Burns. “After Depletion: The Replenishment of the Self’s Regulatory
Resources.” Self and Identity 7, no. 3 (2008): 305–21.
Valdesolo, Piercarlo, Jennifer Ouyang, and David De Steno. “The Rhythm of Joint Action: Synchrony
Promotes Cooperative Ability.” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 46, no. 4 (July 2010): 693–
95.
Valkanova, Vyara, Klaus P. Ebmeier, and Charlotte L. Allan. “CRP, IL-6 and Depression: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Longitudinal Studies.” Journal of Aﬀective Disorders 150, no.
3 (2013): 736–44.
van der Velden, Anne Maj, Willem Kuyken, et al. “A Systematic Review of Mechanisms of Change in
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy in the Treatment of Recurrent Major Depressive Disorder.”
Clinical Psychology Review 37 (2015): 26–39.
van Dernoot Lipsky, Laura. Trauma Stewardship: An Everyday Guide to Caring for Self While Caring
for Others. ReadHowYouWant.com, 2010.
van Mol, M. M., E. J. Kompanje, et al. “The Prevalence of Compassion Fatigue and Burnout Among
Healthcare Professionals in Intensive Care Units: A Systematic Review.” PLOS One 10, no. 8 (2015):
p.e0136955.
Vander Wal, Jillon S. “Unhealthy Weight Control Behaviors Among Adolescents.” Journal of Health
Psychology 17, no. 1 (2012): 110–20.

[PDF page 247]

Verkuil, Bart, Jos F. Brosschot, et al. “Prolonged Non-Metabolic Heart Rate Variability Reduction as a
Physiological Marker of Psychological Stress in Daily Life.” Annals of Behavioral Medicine 50, no. 5
(2016): 704–14.
Vos, Joel. “Working with Meaning in Life in Mental Health Care: A Systematic Literature Review of
the Practices and Eﬀectiveness of Meaning-Centred Therapies.” In Clinical Perspectives on Meaning,
ed. Russo-Netzer P., Schulenberg S., Batthyany A. Springer International, 2016.
Vromans, Lynette P., and Robert D. Schweitzer. “Narrative Therapy for Adults with Major Depressive
Disorder: Improved Symptom and Interpersonal Outcomes.” Psychotherapy Research 21, no. 1 (2011):
4–15.
Walker, Matthew. Why We Sleep: Unlocking the Power of Sleep and Dreams. Simon & Schuster, 2017.
Walsh, Froma. “Human-Animal Bonds I: The Relational Signiﬁcance of Companion Animals.” Family
Process 48, no. 4 (2009): 462–80.
Watts, Jenny, and Noelle Robertson. “Burnout in University Teaching Staﬀ: A Systematic Literature
Review.” Educational Research 53, no. 1 (2011): 33–50.
Weber, Mim, Kierrynn Davis, and Lisa McPhie. “Narrative Therapy, Eating Disorders and Groups:
Enhancing Outcomes in Rural NSW.” Australian Social Work 59, no. 4 (2006): 391–405.
Whelton, William J., and Leslie S. Greenberg. “Emotion in Self-Criticism.” Personality and Individual
Diﬀerences 38, no. 7 (2005): 1583–95.
White, Michael. Maps of Narrative Practice. Norton, 2007.
Whitﬁeld-Gabrieli, Susan, and Judith M. Ford. “Default Mode Network Activity and Connectivity in
Psychopathology.” Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 8 (2012): 49–76.
Williamson, Ann M., and Anne-Marie Feyer. “Moderate Sleep Deprivation Produces Impairments in
Cognitive and Motor Performance Equivalent to Legally Prescribed Levels of Alcohol Intoxication.”
Occupational and Environmental Medicine 57, no. 10 (2000): 649–55.
Wilson, Stephanie J., Lisa M. Jaremka, et al. “Shortened Sleep Fuels Inﬂammatory Responses to
Marital Conﬂict: Emotion Regulation Matters.” Psychoneuroendocrinology 79 (2017): 74–83.
Wilson, Timothy D., David A. Reinhard, et al. “Just Think: The Challenges of the Disengaged Mind.”
Science 345, no. 6192 (2014): 75–77.
Withers, Rachel. “8 Women Who Were Warned, Given an Explanation, and Nevertheless, Persisted.”
Bust, https://bust.com/ feminism/ 19060-kamala-harris-tweets-women-who-persisted.html.
Witvliet, C. V. O., A. J. Hofelich Mohr, et al. “Transforming or Restraining Rumination: The Impact of
Compassionate Reappraisal Versus Emotion Suppression on Empathy, Forgiveness, and Aﬀective

[PDF page 248]

Psychophysiology.” Journal of Positive Psychology 10 (2015): 248–61.
Xi, Bo, Dan He, et al. “Short Sleep Duration Predicts Risk of Metabolic Syndrome: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” Sleep Medicine Reviews 18, no. 4 (2014): 293–97.

[PDF page 249]

about the authors
EMILY NAGOSKI is the author of Come As You Are: The
Surprising New Science That Will Transform Your Sex Life.
She has a PhD in health behavior with a minor in human
sexuality from Indiana University, and an MS in counseling,
also from IU, including a clinical internship at the Kinsey
Institute sexual health clinic. She has been a sex educator for
twenty years and currently works as the inaugural director of
wellness education at Smith College.
Facebook.com/ enagoski
Twitter: @EmilyNagoski
AMELIA NAGOSKI holds a DMA in conducting from the
University of Connecticut. An assistant professor and
coordinator of music at Western New England University, she
regularly presents educational sessions discussing the
application of communications science and psychological
research for audiences of other professional musicians,
including “Beyond Burnout Prevention: Embodied Wellness
for Conductors.”

[PDF page 250]

What’s next onyour reading list?
Discover your nextgreat read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date new s about this author.
Sign up now.