

[PDF page 1]



[PDF page 2]

Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster
eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other
great books from Simon & Schuster.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

[PDF page 3]



[PDF page 4]



[PDF page 5]

contents
Introduction: Yes, You Are Normal
The True Story of Sex
The Organization of This Book
A Couple of Caveats
If You Feel Broken, or Know Someone Who Does
part 1 the (not-so-basic) basics
1. Anatomy: No Two Alike
The Beginning
The Clit, the Whole Clit, and Nothing but the Clit
Meet Your Clitoris
Lips, Both Great and Small
Hymen Truths
A Word on Words
The Sticky Bits
Intersex Parts
Why It Matters
Change How You See
A Better Metaphor
What It Is, Not What It Means
2. The Dual Control Model: Your Sexual Personality
Turn On the Ons, Turn Oﬀ the Oﬀs
Arousability
What “Medium” Means
Diﬀerent for Girls . . . but Not Necessarily

[PDF page 6]

What Turns You On?
All the Same Parts, Organized in Diﬀerent Ways
Can You Change Your SIS or SES?
3. Context: And the “One Ring” (to Rule Them All) in Your Emotional Brain
Sensation in Context
Sex, Rats, and Rock ’n’ Roll
Your Emotional One Ring
You Can’t Make Them
“Is Something Wrong with Me?” (Answer: Nope)
part 2 sex in context
4. Emotional Context: Sex in a Monkey Brain
The Stress Response Cycle: Fight, Flight, and Freeze
Stress and Sex
Broken Culture 
  Broken Stress Response Cycles
Complete the Cycle!
When Sex Becomes the Lion
Sex and the Survivor
Origin of Love
The Science of Falling in Love
Attachment and Sex: The Dark Side
Attachment and Sex: Sex That Advances the Plot
Attachment Style
Managing Attachment: Your Feels as a Sleepy Hedgehog
Survival of the Social
The Water of Life
5. Cultural Context: A Sex-Positive Life in a Sex-Negative World
Three Messages
You Are Beautiful
Criticizing Yourself = Stress = Reduced Sexual Pleasure
Health at Every Size
“Dirty”

[PDF page 7]

When Somebody “Yucks” Your “Yum”
Maximizing Yum . . . with Science! Part 1: Self-Compassion
Maximizing Yum . . . with Science! Part 2: Cognitive Dissonance
Maximizing Yum . . . with Science! Part 3: Media Nutrition
You Do You
part 3 sex in action
6. Arousal: Lubrication Is Not Causation
Measuring and Deﬁning Nonconcordance
All the Same Parts, Organized in Diﬀerent Ways: “This Is a Restaurant”
Nonconcordance in Other Emotions
Lubrication Error #1: Genital Response = “Turned On”
Lubrication Error #2: Genital Response Is Enjoying
Lubrication Error #3: Nonconcordance Is a Problem
Medicating Away the Brakes
“Honey . . . I’m Nonconcordant!”
Ripe Fruit
7. Desire: Actually, It’s Not a Drive
Desire = Arousal in Context
Not a Drive. For Real.
Why It Matters That It’s Not a Drive
“But Emily, Sometimes It Feels Like a Drive!”
Impatient Little Monitors
Good News! It’s Probably Not Your Hormones
More Good News! It’s Not Monogamy, Either
“Isn’t It Just Culture?”
It Might Be the Chasing Dynamic
Maximizing Desire . . . with Science! Part 1: Arousing the One Ring
Maximizing Desire . . . with Science! Part 2: Turning Oﬀ the Oﬀs
Maximizing Desire . . . with Science! Part 3: Desperate Measures
Sharing Your Garden

[PDF page 8]

part 4 ecstasy for everybody
8. Orgasm: The Fantastic Bonus
Nonconcordance—Now with Orgasms!
No Two Alike
All the Same Parts . . .
Your Vagina’s Okay, Either Way
The Evolution of the Fantastic Bonus
Diﬃculty with Orgasm
Ecstatic Orgasm: You’re a Flock!
How Do You Medicate a Flock?
Flying Toward Ecstasy
9. Meta-Emotions: The Ultimate Sex-Positive Context
Can’t Get No . . .
The Map and the Terrain
Positive Meta-Emotions Step 1: Trust the Terrain
Positive Meta-Emotions Step 2: Let Go of the Map (the Hard Part)
How to Let Go: Nonjudging
Nonjudging = “Emotion Coaching”
Nonjudging: Tips for Beginners
“No Good Reason”
Healing Trauma with Nonjudging
When Partners Dismiss!
Inﬂuencing the Little Monitor Part 1: Changing Your Criterion Velocity
Inﬂuencing the Little Monitor Part 2: Changing the Kind of Eﬀort
Inﬂuencing the Little Monitor Part 3: Changing the Goal
“To Feel Normal”
“This Is It”
Conclusion: You Are the Secret Ingredient
Why I Wrote This Book
Where to Look for More Answers
Acknowledgments

[PDF page 9]

Appendix 1: Therapeutic Masturbation
Appendix 2: Extended Orgasm
About the Author
Notes
References
Index

[PDF page 10]

For my students

[PDF page 11]

introduction
YES, YOU ARE NORMAL
To be a sex educator is to be asked questions. I’ve stood in college
dining halls with a plate of food in my hands answering questions about
orgasm. I’ve been stopped in hotel lobbies at professional conferences
to answer questions about vibrators. I’ve sat on a park bench, checking
social media on my phone, only to ﬁnd questions from a stranger about
her asymmetrical genitals. I’ve gotten emails from students, from
friends, from their friends, from total strangers about sexual desire,
sexual arousal, sexual pleasure, sexual pain, orgasm, fetishes,
fantasies, bodily ﬂuids, and more.
Questions like . . .
• Once my partner initiates, I’m into it, but it seems like it never even occurs to me to be
the one to start things. Why is that?
• My boyfriend was like, “You’re not ready, you’re still dry.” But I was so ready. So why
wasn’t I wet?
• I saw this thing about women who can’t enjoy sex because they worry about their
bodies the whole time. That’s me. How do I stop doing that?
• I read something about women who stop wanting sex after a while in a relationship,
even if they still love their partner. That’s me. How do I start wanting sex with my partner
again?
• I think maybe I peed when I had an orgasm . . . ?
• I think maybe I’ve never had an orgasm . . . ?
Under all these questions, there’s really just one question:
Am I normal?
(The answer is nearly always: Yes.)
This book is a collection of answers. They’re answers that I’ve seen
change women’s lives, answers informed by the most current science
and by the personal stories of women whose growing understanding of
sex has transformed their relationships with their own bodies. These
women are my heroines, and I hope that by telling their stories, I’ll

[PDF page 12]

empower you to follow your own path, to reach for and achieve your own
profound and unique sexual potential.
the true story of sex
After all the books that have been written about sex, all the blogs and
TV shows and radio Q&As, how can it be that we all still have so many
questions?
Well. The frustrating reality is we’ve been lied to—not deliberately, it’s
no one’s fault, but still. We were told the wrong story.
For a long, long time in Western science and medicine, women’s
sexuality was viewed as Men’s Sexuality Lite—basically the same but
not quite as good.
For instance, it was just sort of assumed that since men have
orgasms during penis-in-vagina sex (intercourse), women should have
orgasms with intercourse too, and if they don’t, it’s because they’re
broken.
In reality, about 30 percent of women orgasm reliably with
intercourse. The other 70 percent sometimes, rarely, or never orgasm
with intercourse, and they’re all healthy and normal. A woman might
orgasm lots of other ways—manual sex, oral sex, vibrators, breast
stimulation, toe sucking, pretty much any way you can imagine—and still
not orgasm during intercourse. That’s normal.
It was just assumed, too, that because a man’s genitals typically
behave the way his mind is behaving—if his penis is erect, he’s feeling
turned on—a woman’s genitals should also match her emotional
experience.
And again, some women’s do, many don’t. A woman can be perfectly
normal and healthy and experience “arousal nonconcordance,” where
the behavior of her genitals (being wet or dry) may not match her mental
experience (feeling turned on or not).
And it was also assumed that because men experience spontaneous,
out-of-the-blue desire for sex, women should also want sex
spontaneously.
Again it turns out that’s true sometimes, but not necessarily. A woman
can be perfectly normal and healthy and never experience spontaneous
sexual desire. Instead, she may experience “responsive” desire, in
which her desire emerges only in a highly erotic context.

[PDF page 13]

In reality, women and men are diﬀerent.
But wait. Women and men both experience orgasm, desire, and
arousal, and men, too, can experience responsive desire, arousal
nonconcordance, and lack of orgasm with penetration. Women and men
both can fall in love, fantasize, masturbate, feel puzzled about sex, and
experience ecstatic pleasure. They both can ooze ﬂuids, travel forbidden
paths of sexual imagination, encounter the unexpected and startling
ways that sex shows up in every domain of life—and confront the
unexpected and startling ways that sex sometimes declines, politely or
otherwise, to show up.
So . . . are women and men really that diﬀerent?
The problem here is that we’ve been taught to think about sex in
terms of behavior, rather than in terms of the biological, psychological,
and social processes underlying the behavior. We think about our
physiological behavior—blood ﬂow and genital secretions and heart
rate. We think about our social behavior—what we do in bed, whom we
do it with, and how often. A lot of books about sex focus on those things;
they tell you how many times per week the average couple has sex or
they oﬀer instructions on how to have an orgasm, and they can be
helpful.
But if you really want to understand human sexuality, behavior alone
won’t get you there. Trying to understand sex by looking at behavior is
like trying to understand love by looking at a couple’s wedding
portrait  . . . and their divorce papers. Being able to describe what
happened—two people got married and then got divorced—doesn’t get
us very far. What we want to know is why and how it came to be. Did our
couple fall out of love after they got married, and that’s why they
divorced? Or were they never in love but were forced to marry, and
ﬁnally became free when they divorced? Without better evidence, we’re
mostly guessing.
Until very recently, that’s how it’s been for sex—mostly guessing. But
we’re at a pivotal moment in sex science because, after decades of
research describing what happens in human sexual response, we’re
ﬁnally ﬁguring out the why and how—the process underlying the
behavior.
In the last decade of the twentieth century, researchers Erick Janssen
and John Bancroft at the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender,
and Reproduction developed a model of human sexual response that
provides an organizing principle for understanding the true story of sex.

[PDF page 14]

According to their “dual control model,” the sexual response mechanism
in our brains consists of a pair of universal components—a sexual
accelerator and sexual brakes—and those components respond to
broad categories of sexual stimuli—including genital sensations, visual
stimulation, and emotional context. And the sensitivity of each
component varies from person to person.
The result is that sexual arousal, desire, and orgasm are nearly
universal experiences, but when and how we experience them depends
largely on the sensitivities of our “brakes” and “accelerator” and on the
kind of stimulation they’re given.
This is the mechanism underlying the behavior—the why and the how.
And it’s the rule that governs the story I’ll be telling in this book: We’re all
made of the same parts, but in each of us, those parts are organized in
a unique way that changes over our life span.
No organization is better or worse than any other, and no phase in our
life span is better or worse than any other; they’re just diﬀerent. An apple
tree can be healthy no matter what variety of apple it is—though one
variety may need constant direct sunlight and another might enjoy some
shade. And an apple tree can be healthy when it’s a seed, when it’s a
seedling, as it’s growing, and as it fades at the end of the season, as
well as when, in late summer, it is laden with fruit. But it has diﬀerent
needs at each of those phases in its life.
You, too, are healthy and normal at the start of your sexual
development, as you grow, and as you bear the fruits of living with
conﬁdence and joy inside your body. You are healthy when you need
lots of sun, and you’re healthy when you enjoy some shade. That’s the
true story. We are all the same. We are all diﬀerent. We are all normal.
the organization of this book
The book is divided into four parts: (1) The (Not-So-Basic) Basics; (2)
Sex in Context; (3) Sex in Action; and (4) Ecstasy for Everybody. The
three chapters in the ﬁrst part describe the basic hardware you were
born with—a body, a brain, and a world. In chapter 1, I talk about
genitals—their parts, the meaning we impose on those parts, and the
science that proves deﬁnitively that yes, your genitals are perfectly
healthy and beautiful just as they are. Chapter 2 details the sexual
response mechanism in the brain—the dual control model of inhibition

[PDF page 15]

and excitation, or brakes and accelerator. Then in chapter 3, I introduce
the ways that your sexual brakes and accelerator interact with the many
other systems in your brain and environment, to shape whether a
particular sensation or person turns you on, right now, in this moment.
In the second part of the book, “Sex in Context,” we think about how
all the basic hardware functions within the context of your actual life—
your emotions, your relationship, your feelings about your body, and
your attitudes toward sex. Chapter 4 focuses on two primary emotional
systems, love and stress, and the surprising and contradictory ways
they can inﬂuence your sexual responsiveness. Then chapter 5
describes the cultural forces that shape and constrain sexual
functioning, and how you can maximize the good things about this
process and overcome the destructive things. What we’ll learn is that
context—your external circumstances and your present mental state—is
as crucial to your sexual wellbeing as your body and brain. Master the
content in these chapters and your sexual life will transform—along with,
quite possibly, the rest of your life.
The third part of the book, “Sex in Action,” is about sexual response
itself, and I bust two long-standing and dangerous myths. Chapter 6 lays
out the evidence that sexual arousal may or may not have anything to do
with what’s happening in your genitals. This is where we learn why
arousal nonconcordance, which I mentioned earlier, is normal and
healthy. And after you read chapter 7, you will never again hear
someone say “sex drive” without thinking to yourself, Ah, but sex is not
a drive. In this chapter I explain how “responsive desire” works. If you
(or your partner) have ever experienced a change in your interest in sex
—increase or decrease—this is an important chapter for you.
And the fourth part of the book, “Ecstasy for Everybody,” explains
how to make sex entirely yours, which is how you create peak sexual
ecstasy in your life. Chapter 8 is about orgasms—what they are, what
they’re not, how to have them, and how to make them like the ones you
read about, the ones that turn the stars into rainbows. And ﬁnally, in
Chapter 9, I describe the single most important thing you can do to
improve your sex life. But I’ll give it away right now: It turns out what
matters most is not the parts you are made of or how they are
organized, but how you feel about those parts. When you embrace your
sexuality precisely as it is right now, that’s the context that creates the
greatest potential for ecstatic pleasure.

[PDF page 16]

Several chapters include worksheets or other interactive activities and
exercises. A lot of these are fun—like in chapter 3, I ask you to think
about times when you’ve had great sex and identify what aspects of the
context helped to make that sex great. All of them turn the science into
something practical that can genuinely transform your sex life.
Throughout the book, you’ll follow the stories of four women—Olivia,
Merritt, Camilla, and Laurie. These women don’t exist as individuals;
they’re composites, integrating the real stories of the many women I’ve
taught, talked with, emailed, and supported in my two decades as a sex
educator. You can imagine each woman as a collage of snapshots—the
face from one photograph, the arms from another, the feet from a
third . . . each part represents someone real, and the collection hangs
together meaningfully, but I’ve invented the relationships that the parts
have to each other.
I’ve chosen to construct these composites rather than tell the stories
of speciﬁc women for two reasons. First, people tell me their stories in
conﬁdence, and I want to protect their identities, so I’ve changed details
in order to keep their story their story. And second, I believe I can
describe the widest possible variety of women’s sexual experiences by
focusing not on speciﬁc stories of one individual woman but on the larger
narratives that contain the common themes I’ve seen in all these
hundreds of women’s lives.
And ﬁnally, at the end of each chapter you’ll ﬁnd a “tl;dr” list—“too
long; didn’t read,” the blunt Internet abbreviation that means, “Just get
to the point.” Each tl;dr list brieﬂy summarizes the four most important
messages in the chapter. If you ﬁnd yourself thinking, “My friend Alice
should totally read this chapter!” or “I really wish my partner knew this,”
you might start by showing them the tl;dr list.I Or, if you’re like me and
get too excited about these ideas to keep them to yourself, you can
follow your partner around the house, reading the tl;dr list out loud and
saying, “See, honey, arousal nonconcordance is a thing!” or “It turns out
I have responsive desire!” or “You give me great context, sweetie!”
a couple of caveats
First, most of the time when I say “women” in this book, I mean people
who were born in female bodies, were raised as girls, and now have the
social role and psychological identity of “woman.” There are plenty of

[PDF page 17]

women who don’t ﬁt one or more of those characteristics, but there’s too
little research on trans* and genderqueer sexual functioning for me to
say with certainty whether what’s true about cisgender women’s sexual
wellbeing is also true for trans* folks. I think it probably is, and as more
research emerges over the coming decade we’ll ﬁnd out, but in the
meantime I want to acknowledge that this is basically a book about
cisgender women.
And if you don’t know what any of that means, don’t worry about it.
Second, I am passionate about the role of science in promoting
women’s sexual wellbeing, and I have worked hard in this book to
encapsulate the research in the service of teaching women to live with
conﬁdence and joy inside their bodies. But I’ve been very intentional
about the empirical details I’ve included or excluded. I asked myself,
“Does this fact help women have better sex lives, or is it just a totally
fascinating and important empirical puzzle?”
And I cut the puzzles.
I kept only the science that has the most immediate relevance in
women’s everyday lives. So what you’ll ﬁnd in these pages isn’t the
whole story of women’s sexuality—I’m not sure the whole story would
actually ﬁt in one book. Instead, I’ve included the parts of the story that
I’ve found most powerful in my work as a sex educator, promoting
women’s sexual wellbeing, autonomy, and pleasure.
The purpose of this book is to oﬀer a new, science-based way of
thinking about women’s sexual wellbeing. Like all new ways of thinking,
it opens up a lot of questions and challenges much preexisting
knowledge. If you want to dive deeper, you’ll ﬁnd references in the
notes, along with details about my process for boiling down a complex
and multifaceted body of research into something practical.
if you feel broken, or know someone who does
One more thing before we get into chapter 1. Remember how I said
we’ve all been lied to, but it’s no one’s fault? I want to take a moment to
recognize the damage done by that lie.
So many women come to my blog or to my class or to my public talks
convinced that they are sexually broken. They feel dysfunctional.
Abnormal. And on top of that, they feel anxious, frustrated, and hopeless

[PDF page 18]

about the lack of information and support they’ve received from medical
professionals, therapists, partners, family, and friends.
“Just relax,” they’ve been told. “Have a glass of wine.”
Or, “Women just don’t want sex that much. Get over it.”
Or, “Sometimes sex hurts—can’t you just ignore it?”
I understand the frustration these women experience, and the despair
—and in the second half of the book I talk about the neurological
process that traps people in frustration and despair, shutting them oﬀ
from hope and joy, and I describe science-based ways to get out of the
trap.
Here’s what I need you to know right now: The information in this
book will show you that whatever you’re experiencing in your sexuality—
whether it’s challenges with arousal, desire, orgasm, pain, no sexual
sensations—is the result of your sexual response mechanism
functioning appropriately . . . in an inappropriate world. You are normal;
it is the world around you that’s broken.
That’s actually the bad news.
The good news is that when you understand how your sexual
response mechanism works, you can begin to take control of your
environment and your brain in order to maximize your sexual potential,
even in a broken world. And when you change your environment and
your brain, you can change—and heal—your sexual functioning.
This book contains information that I have seen transform women’s
sexual wellbeing. I’ve seen it transform men’s understanding of their
women partners. I’ve seen same-sex couples look at each other and
say, “Oh. So that’s what was going on.” Students, friends, blog readers,
and even fellow sex educators have read a blog post or heard me give a
talk and said, “Why didn’t anyone tell me this before? It explains
everything!”
I know for sure that what I’ve written in this book can help you. It may
not be enough to heal all the wounds inﬂicted on your sexuality by a
culture in which it sometimes feels nearly impossible for a woman to
“do” sexuality right, but it will provide powerful tools in support of your
healing.
How do I know?
Evidence, of course!
At the end of one semester, I asked my 187 students to write down
one really important thing they learned in my class. Here’s a small
sample of what they wrote:

[PDF page 19]

I am normal!
I AM NORMAL
I learned that everything is NORMAL, making it possible to go through the rest of my
life with conﬁdence and joy.
I learned that I am normal! And I learned that some people have spontaneous desire
and others have responsive desire and this fact helped me really understand my personal
life.
Women vary! And just because I do not experience my sexuality in the same way as
many other women, that does not make me abnormal.
Women’s sexual desire, arousal, response, etc., is incredibly varied.
The one thing I can count on regarding sexuality is that people vary, a lot.
That everyone is diﬀerent and everything is normal; no two alike.
No two alike!
And many more. More than half of them wrote some version of “I am
normal.”
I sat in my oﬃce and read those responses with tears in my eyes.
There was something urgently important to my students about feeling
“normal,” and somehow my class had cleared a path to that feeling.
The science of women’s sexual wellbeing is young, and there is much
still to be learned. But this young science has already discovered truths
about women’s sexuality that have transformed my students’
relationships with their bodies—and it has certainly transformed mine. I
wrote this book to share the science, stories, and sex-positive insights
that prove to us that, despite our culture’s vested interest in making us
feel broken, dysfunctional, unlovely, and unlovable, we are in fact fully
capable of conﬁdent, joyful sex.
•  •  •
The promise of Come as You Are is this: No matter where you are in
your sexual journey right now, whether you have an awesome sex life
and want to expand the awesomeness, or you’re struggling and want to
ﬁnd solutions, you will learn something that will improve your sex life and
transform the way you understand what it means to be a sexual being.
And you’ll discover that, even if you don’t yet feel that way, you are
already sexually whole and healthy.
The science says so.
I can prove it.

[PDF page 20]

I. I’ll use “they” as a singular pronoun, rather than “he or she” throughout the book. It’s simpler,
as well as more inclusive of folks outside the gender binary.

[PDF page 21]

part 1
the (not-so-basic) basics

[PDF page 22]

one
anatomy
NO TWO ALIKE
Olivia likes to watch herself in the mirror when she masturbates.
Like many women, Olivia masturbates lying on her back and
rubbing her clitoris with her hand. Unlike many women, she props
herself up on one elbow in front of a full-length mirror and watches
her ﬁngers moving in the folds of her vulva.
“I started when I was a teenager,” she told me. “I had seen porn
on the Internet, and I was curious about what I looked like, so I got
a mirror and started pulling apart my labia so I could see my clit,
and what can I say? It felt good, so I started masturbating.”
It’s not the only way she masturbates. She also enjoys the
“pulse” spray on her showerhead, she has a small army of
vibrators at her command, and she spent several months teaching
herself to have “breath” orgasms, coming without touching her
body at all.
This is the kind of thing women tell you when you’re a sex
educator.
She also told me that looking at her vulva convinced her that
her sexuality was more like a man’s, because her clitoris is
comparatively large—“like a baby carrot, almost”—which, she
concluded, made her more masculine; it must be bigger because
she had more testosterone, which in turn made her a horny lady.
I told her, “Actually there’s no evidence of a relationship
between an adult woman’s hormone levels, genital shape or size,
and sexual desire or response.”
“Are you sure about that?” she asked.
“Well, some women have ‘testosterone-dependent’ desire,” I
said, pondering, “which means they need a certain very low

[PDF page 23]

minimum of T, but that’s not the same as ‘high testosterone.’ And
the distance between the clitoris and the urethra predicts how
reliably orgasmic a woman is during intercourse, but that’s a whole
other thing. I’d be fascinated to see a study that directly asked the
question, but the available evidence suggests that variation in
women’s genital shapes, sizes, and colors doesn’t predict
anything in particular about her level of sexual interest.”
“Oh,” she said. And that single syllable said to me: “Emily, you
have missed the point.”
Olivia is a psychology grad student—a former student of mine,
an activist around women’s reproductive health issues, and now
doing her own research, which is how we got started on this
conversation—so I got excited about the opportunity to talk about
the science. But with that quiet, “Oh,” I realized that this wasn’t
about the science for Olivia. It was about her struggle to embrace
her body and her sexuality just as it is, when so much of her
culture was trying to convince her there is something wrong with
her.
So I said, “You know, your clitoris is totally normal. Everyone’s
genitals are made of all the same parts, just organized in diﬀerent
ways. The diﬀerences don’t necessarily mean anything, they’re just
varieties of beautiful and healthy. Actually,” I continued, “that could
be the most important thing you’ll ever learn about human
sexuality.”
“Really?” she asked. “Why?”
This chapter is the answer to that question.
Medieval anatomists called women’s external genitals the
“pudendum,” a word derived from the Latin pudere, meaning “to make
ashamed.” Our genitalia were thus named “from the shamefacedness
that is in women to have them seen.”1
Wait: what?
The reasoning went like this: Women’s genitals are tucked away
between their legs, as if they wanted to be hidden, whereas male
genitals face forward, for all to see. And why would men’s and women’s
genitals be diﬀerent in this way? If you’re a medieval anatomist, steeped
in a sexual ethic of purity, it’s because: shame.
Now, if we assume “shame” isn’t really why women’s genitals are
under the body—and I hope it’s eye-rollingly obvious that it’s not—why,

[PDF page 24]

biologically, are male genitals in front and female genitals underneath?
The answer is, they’re actually not! The female equivalent to the penis
—the clitoris—is positioned right up front, in the equivalent location to
the penis. It’s less obvious than the penis because it’s smaller—and it’s
smaller not because it’s shy or ashamed, but because females don’t
have to transport our DNA from inside our own bodies to inside
someone else’s body. And the female equivalent of the scrotum—the
outer labia—is also located in very much the same place as the
scrotum, but because the female gonads (the ovaries) are internal,
rather than external like the testicles, the labia don’t extend much past
the body, so they’re less obvious. Again, the ovaries are not internal
because of shame, but because we’re the ones who get pregnant.
In short, female genitals appear “hidden” only if you look at them
through the lens of cultural assumptions rather than through the eyes of
biology.
We’ll see this over and over again throughout the book: Culture
adopts a random act of biology and tries to make it Meaningful, with a
capital “Mmmh.” We metaphorize genitals, seeing what they are like
rather than what they are, we superimpose cultural Meaning on them, as
Olivia superimposed the meaning of “masculine” on her largish clitoris,
to conclude that her anatomy had some grand meaning about her as
sexually masculine.
When you can see your body as it is, rather than what culture
proclaims it to Mean, then you experience how much easier it is to live
with and love your genitals, along with the rest of your sexuality,
precisely as they are.
So in this chapter, we’ll look at our genitals through biological eyes,
cultural lenses oﬀ. First, I’ll walk you through the ways that male and
female genitals are made of exactly the same parts, just organized in
diﬀerent ways. I’ll point out where the biology says one thing and culture
says something else, and you can decide which makes more sense to
you. I’ll illustrate how the idea of all the same parts, organized in diﬀerent
ways extends far beyond our anatomy to every aspect of human sexual
response, and I’ll argue that this might be the most important thing you’ll
ever learn about your sexuality.
In the end, I’ll oﬀer a new central metaphor to replace all the wacky,
biased, or nonsensical ones that culture has tried to impose on women’s
bodies. My goal in this chapter is to introduce an alternative way of
thinking about your body and your sexuality, so that you can relate to

[PDF page 25]

your body on its own terms, rather than on terms somebody else chose
for you.
the beginning
Imagine two fertilized eggs that have just implanted in a uterus. One is
XX—genetically female—and the other is XY—genetically male.
Fraternal twins, a sister and a brother. Faces, ﬁngers, and feet—the
siblings will develop all the same body parts, but the parts will be
organized diﬀerently, to give them the individual bodies that will be
instantly distinguishable from each other as they grow up. And just as
their faces will each have two eyes, one nose, and a mouth, all arranged
in more or less the same places, so their genitals will have all the same
basic elements, organized in roughly the same way. But unlike their
faces and ﬁngers and feet, their genitals will develop before birth into
conﬁgurations that their parents will automatically recognize as male or
female.

[PDF page 26]

All the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways. Every body’s genitals are the same until six
weeks into gestation, when the universal genital hardware begins to organize itself into either the
female conﬁguration or the male conﬁguration.

[PDF page 27]

Here’s how it happens. About six weeks after the fertilized egg
implants in the uterus, there is a wash of masculinizing hormones. The
male blastocyst (a group of cells that will form the embryo) responds to
this by developing its “prefab” universal genital hardware into the male
conﬁguration of penis, testicles, and scrotum. The female blastocyst
does not respond to the hormone wash at all, and instead develops its
prefab universal genital hardware into the default, female conﬁguration
of clitoris, ovaries, and labia.
Welcome to the wonderful world of biological homology.
Homologues are traits that have the same biological origins, though
they may have diﬀerent functions. Each part of the external genitalia has
a homologue in the other sex. I’ve mentioned two of them already: Both
male and female genitals have a round-ended, highly sensitive,
multichambered organ to which blood ﬂows during sexual arousal. On
females, it’s the clitoris; on males, it’s the penis. And each has an organ
that is soft, stretchy, and grows coarse hair after puberty. On females,
it’s the outer lips (labia majora); on males, it’s the scrotum. These parts
don’t just look superﬁcially alike; they are developed from the equivalent
fetal tissue. If you look closely at a scrotum, you’ll notice a seam running
up the center—the scrotal raphe. That’s where his scrotum would have
split into labia if he had developed female genitals instead.
Homology is also why both brother and sister will have nipples.
Nipples on females are vital to the survival of almost all mammal
species, including humans (though a handful of old mammals, such as
the platypus, don’t have nipples, and instead just leak milk from their
abdomens), so evolution built nipples in right at the very beginning of our
fetal development. It takes less energy to just leave them there than to
actively suppress them—and evolution is as lazy as it can get away with
—so both males and females have nipples. Same biological origins—
diﬀerent functions.
the clit, the whole clit, and nothing but the clit
The clitoris and penis are the external genital organs most densely
packed with nerve endings. The visible part of the clitoris, the glans
clitoris, is located right up at the top of the genitals—some distance from
the vagina, you’ll notice. (This fact will be crucial when I talk about
orgasm, in chapter 8.) The clitoris is . . .

[PDF page 28]

The hokey pokey—it’s what it’s all about.
Two turntables and a microphone—it’s where it’s at.
A Visa card—it’s everywhere you want to be.
It is your Grand Central Station of erotic sensation. Averaging just
one-eighth the size of a penis yet loaded with nearly double the nerve
endings, it can range in size from a barely visible pea to a fair-sized
gherkin, or anywhere in between, and it’s all normal, all beautiful.
Unlike the penis, the clitoris’s only job is sensation. The penis has four
jobs: sensation, penetration, ejaculation, and urination.
Two diﬀerent ways of functioning, one shared biological origin.
The visible part of the clitoris—the glans—is actually just the head of
the clit, just as the glans penis—the vaguely acorn-shaped cap at the
end of the penile shaft—is just the head. There’s a lot more to it, though.
The shaft of the penis is familiar to many. It is constructed of three
chambers: a pair of cavernous bodies (corpora cavernosa) and a
spongy body (corpus spongiosum), through which the urethra passes.
All three of these chambers extend deep into the body. The corpus
spongiosum ends in the bulb of the penis deep inside the pelvis. The
corpora cavernosa taper away from each other and attach the pelvic
bone.
The cultural understanding of clitoris is “the little nub at the top of the
vulva.” But the biological understanding of clitoris is more like “far-
ranging mostly internal anatomical structure with a head emerging at the
top of the vulva.” Like the penis, the clitoris is composed of three
chambers: a pair of legs (crura) that extend deep within the tissue of the
vulva, which are homologous to the corpora cavernosa, and the bulbs of
the vestibule, homologous to the corpus spongiosum, including its bulb
of the penis. The vestibule is the mouth of the vagina; the bulbs extend
from the head of the clitoris, deep inside the tissue of the vulva, then
split to straddle the urethra and the vagina. That’s right: The clitoris
extends all the way to the vaginal opening.

[PDF page 29]

The anatomy of the clitoris. The cultural meaning of “clitoris” is often limited to the external part,
the glans. The biological meaning includes a vast range of internal erectile tissue that extends all
the way to the vaginal opening.

[PDF page 30]

The anatomy of the penis. As with the clitoris, the cultural meaning of “penis” is limited to the
external part—the glans and shaft. And, like the clitoris, the penis has internal erectile tissue. All
the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways.

[PDF page 31]

The clitoral hood covers the head of the clitoris, as its homologue, the
foreskin, covers the head of the penis. And the male frenulum—the Y-
spot near the glans, where the foreskin attaches to the shaft—is the
homologue of the female fourchette (the French word for “fork”), the
curve of tissue on the lower edge of the vagina. This is a highly sensitive
and undervalued piece of real estate on all bodies.
meet your clitoris
If you’ve never met your clitoris “face-to-face,” now is the time. (Even if
you’ve had some good chats with your clitoris in the past, feel free to
take this opportunity to get reacquainted.) You can ﬁnd it visually or
manually. After you’ve read the next two paragraphs, put down the book
and try either method.
To ﬁnd it visually, get a mirror, spread your labia (the soft, hairy outer
lips of your vulva), and actually look at it. You’ll see a nub at the top of
your vulva.
Or you can ﬁnd it with your ﬁngers. Start with the tip of your middle
ﬁnger at the cleft where your labia divide. Press down gently, wiggle your
ﬁnger back and forth, and scoot your ﬁngertip slowly down between your
labia until you feel a rubbery little cord under the skin. It might help to
pull your skin taut by tugging upward on your mons with your other hand.
It might also help to lubricate your ﬁnger with spit, commercial lube,
some allergen-free hand cream, or even a little olive oil.
I have a speciﬁc reason for asking you to actually look at your clitoris:
A student came up to me after class one night and told me that she
had been Skyping with her mom, talking about her classes that
semester, including my class, “Women’s Sexuality.” The student
mentioned to her mom that my lecture slides included actual photos of
women’s vulvas, along with diagrams and illustrations. And her mom
told her the most astonishing thing. She said, “I don’t know where the
clitoris is.”
The mom was ﬁfty-four.
So my student emailed her mom my lecture slides.
That story is why the ﬁrst chapter in this book is about anatomy. That
story makes me want to print T-shirts with a drawing of a vulva and an
arrow pointing to the clitoris, saying IT’S RIGHT HERE. It makes me want to
hand out pamphlets on street corners with instructions for locating your

[PDF page 32]

own clitoris, both manually and visually. I want an animated GIF of a
woman pointing to her clitoris to go viral on the Internet. I want a
billboard in Times Square. I want everyone to know.
But even more, it makes me want every single woman reading this to
stop right now and look directly at her clitoris. Knowing where the clitoris
is is important, but knowing where your clitoris is . . . that’s power. Get a
mirror and look at your clitoris, in honor of that student and her brave,
amazing mom.
When I ﬁrst looked at my clitoris, during my earliest training as a sex
educator, I actually cried. I was eighteen and in a bad relationship and
looking for answers. And my instructor had said, “When you go home
tonight, get a mirror and ﬁnd your clitoris.” So I did. And I was stunned to
tears to ﬁnd that there was nothing gross or weird about it, it was just . . .
part of my body. It belonged to me.
That moment set the stage for a decade of discovering and
rediscovering that my best source of knowledge about my sexuality was
my own body.
So go look at your clitoris.
And as long as you’re in the neighborhood, check out the rest of your
vulva, too.
I love having nontraditional students in my class—those who aren’t
in that eighteen-to-twenty-two age range—and Merritt was as
nontraditional as they come: a perimenopausal lesbian author of
gay erotica, with a teenage daughter whom she was raising with
her partner of nearly twenty years. I was uninformed enough when
I ﬁrst met her to be surprised when she told me that her Korean
parents were Fundamentalist Christians and that she grew up with
quintessential socially conservative values. Which made her
outness as a lesbian, her writing, and her presence in my
classroom all the more remarkable.
At forty-two, Merritt had never considered looking at her clitoris.
It didn’t even cross her mind as a possibility until I suggested it
during the ﬁrst lecture, as I always do. She came up to me after
class and said, “Is it really a good idea to suggest that kids this
young look at their bodies? What if they just . . . shut down?”
“That’s a really important question,” I said. “No one has ever
told me of an experience like that, but it’s not a requirement, so
maybe the folks most likely to have that experience don’t try it.

[PDF page 33]

Still, it’s something I recommend, especially for students who plan
to continue on in public health or medicine, but it’s entirely up to
each person whether or not they want to look.”
Merritt didn’t do it.
Instead, she had her partner, Carol, look—which in some ways
is braver than looking herself—and she looked at her partner’s.
And they talked about what they saw and about how they had
never before taken the time to deliberately look at and talk about
their sexual bodies. And Merritt learned something remarkable,
which she told me about the following week:
“Carol told me she’d looked at her vulva! She was part of a
feminist consciousness-raising group in the ’80s, and they all got
together in a circle with their hand mirrors.”
“Wow!” I said, and meant it.
She held her hands out, palms up, weighing her feelings. “I
don’t know why this kind of thing is so much harder for me than it
is for her. When it comes to sex, I always feel like I’m teetering at
the edge of a cliﬀ with my arms windmilling around me.”
The ambivalence Merritt experienced is absolutely normal for
anyone whose family of origin taught them that sex should ﬁt into a
certain prescribed place in life and nowhere else. But it made
sense for Merritt for other reasons, too, having to do with the way
her brain is wired. I’ll talk about that in chapter 2.
lips, both great and small
Female inner labia (labia minora or small lips) may not be very “inner” at
all, but extend out beyond the big lips—or they may tuck themselves
away, hidden inside the vulva until you go looking for them. And the
inner labia may be all one homogeneous color, or they may show a
gradient of color, darkening toward the tips. All of that is normal and
healthy and beautiful. Long, short, pink, beige, brown—all normal.
The male homologue of the inner labia is the inner foreskin. If a penis
has been circumcised—that is, had its foreskin surgically removed—
there is very often a color change midway down the shaft. That’s
because the skin at the top of the shaft is actually the inner foreskin.
(Because the color change is sometimes evident only after puberty,

[PDF page 34]

guys have asked me if something they did made the color change, but
nope, that’s just how some penises look, bless them.)
The outer labia, too, vary from person to person. Some are densely
hairy, with the hair extending out onto the thigh and around the anus,
while others have very little hair. Some lips are quite puﬀy while others
are relatively ﬂush with the body. Some are the same color as the
surrounding skin, and some are darker or lighter than the surrounding
skin. All normal, all beautiful.
As with the clitoris, the cultural view of labia doesn’t match the
biological reality. Vulvas in soft-core porn are digitally edited to conform
to a speciﬁc standard of “tucked-in” labia and homogeneous coloring, to
be “less detailed.”2 This means that cultural representations of vulvas
are limited to a pretty narrow range. In reality, there is a great deal of
variety among genitals—and there is no medical condition associated
with almost any of the variability. But such limited representations of
women’s bodies may actually be changing women’s perceptions of what
a “normal” vulva looks like.3

[PDF page 35]



[PDF page 36]

One example of a vulva.

[PDF page 37]

So if you decide to have a look at other women’s vulvas—which I
highly recommend, by the way, but only with their enthusiastic consent
—you’ll notice how very, very diﬀerent they all are from each other. Only
rarely do you ﬁnd the tidily tucked-in vulvas you see in Playboy.
Unless you’re experiencing pain (and if you are, check with your
medical provider!), your genitals are perfect exactly as they are.
hymen truths
You may or may not have a hymen—a thin membrane along the lower
edge of your vaginal opening. Whether you have one or not, I guarantee
that virtually everything you were taught about the hymen is wrong.4
The closest thing to true is that during intercourse the hymen can be
painful if it’s not used to being stretched—that’s one of a number of
potential causes of pain with penetration, but it is by no means the most
common. (The most common is lack of lubrication.)
But the hymen doesn’t break and stay broken forever, like some kind
of freshness seal. If a hymen tears or bruises, it heals. And the size of a
hymen doesn’t vary depending on whether the vagina has been
penetrated.5 Also, it usually doesn’t bleed. Any blood with ﬁrstpenetration is more likely due to general vaginal tearing from lack of
lubrication than to damage to the hymen.
What does change when a woman begins having the hymen
stretched regularly is that it grows more ﬂexible. And as a woman’s
hormones change as she approaches the end of adolescence (around
twenty-ﬁve years old), the hymen is likely to atrophy and become much
less noticeable—if it was noticeable at all.
The hymen is another example of the wide variability in female
genitals. Some women are born without hymens. Others have
imperforate hymens (a thin but solid membrane covering all of the
vaginal opening) or microperforate hymens (many tiny holes in an
otherwise solid membrane). Some women have septate hymens, which
feel like a strand of skin stretching across the mouth of the vagina.
Some women’s hymens are durable, others are fragile. Some disappear
early in adolescence, and some are still in evidence past menopause.
Women’s hymens vary because, as far as science has been able to
discover, the hymen was not selected for by evolution. It has no
reproductive or any other function. It’s a byproduct, a little bonus left

[PDF page 38]

behind by the juggernaut of evolutionary selection pressure, like men’s
nipples. It’s the homologue of the seminal colliculus, a crest in the wall of
the urethra where it passes through the prostate and joins with the
seminal ducts.
The hymen is a profound example of the way humans metaphorize
anatomy. Here is an organ that has no biological function, and yet
Western culture made up a powerful story about the hymen a long time
ago. This story has nothing to do with biology and everything to do with
controlling women. Culture saw a “barrier” at the mouth of the vagina
and decided it was a marker of “virginity” (itself a biologically
meaningless idea). Such a weird idea could have been invented only in
a society where women were literally property, their vaginas their most
valuable real estate—a gated community.
Even though the hymen performs no physical or biological function,
many cultures have created myths around the hymen so profound that
there are actually surgeries available to “reconstruct” the hymen, as if it
were a medical necessity. (Where is the surgery to perfect men’s
nipples?)
In a sense, the hymen can be relevant to women’s health: Some
women are beaten or even killed for not having a hymen. Some women
are told they “couldn’t have been raped” because their hymen is intact.
For them, the hymen has real impact on their physical wellbeing, not
because of their anatomy but because of what their culture believes
about that anatomy.
a word on words
One more thing about women’s external genitals: The name for the
whole package of female external genitalia is “vulva.” “Vagina” refers to
the internal reproductive canal that leads up to the uterus. People often
use “vagina” to refer to the vulva, but now you know better. And if you
are standing up naked in front of a mirror and you see the classic
triangle? That’s your mons (“mound”), or mons pubis.
Got that?
Vagina = reproductive canal
Vulva = external genitalia
Mons = area over the pubic bone where hair grows

[PDF page 39]

I’m not suggesting that you go around correcting people who use the
wrong words, or picket The Vagina Monologues with signs saying,
“Actually, they’re The Vulva Monologues,” but now you know what
words you should use. You wouldn’t call your face or your forehead your
throat, right? So let’s not call the vulva or mons the vagina. Let’s make
the world a better place for women’s genitals.
the sticky bits
Woman have a set of glands at either side of the mouth of the vagina,
called Bartholin’s glands, which release ﬂuid during sexual arousal—
maybe to reduce the friction of vaginal penetration, maybe to create a
scent that communicates health and fertility status. When women “get
wet,” this is what’s happening. And it turns out, both women and men
“get wet.” The male homologue, the Cowper’s gland, just below the
prostate, produces preejaculate.
Why do we talk about men “getting hard” and women “getting wet,”
when from a biological perspective both male and female genitals get
both hard and wet? It’s a cultural thing again. Male “hardness”
(erection) is a necessary prerequisite for intercourse, and “wetness” is
taken to be an indication that a woman is “ready” for intercourse (though
in chapter 6, we’ll see how wrong this can be). Since intercourse is
assumed to be the center of the sexual universe, we’ve metaphorized
male hardness and female wetness as the Ultimate Indicators of
Arousal. But like our anatomies, our physiologies are all made of the
same components—changes in blood ﬂow, production of genital
secretions, etc.—organized in diﬀerent ways. We put a spotlight on male
hardness and a spotlight on female wetness, but male wetness is
happening too, and so is female hardness.
Women also have a set of glands at the mouth of the urethra, the
oriﬁce we pee out of, called Skene’s glands. These are the homologue
of the male prostate. The prostate has two jobs: It swells around the
urethra so that it’s impossible for a man to urinate while he’s highly
sexually aroused, and it produces about half of the seminal ﬂuid in which
sperm travels. In other words, it makes ejaculate. In women, the
Skene’s glands also swell around the urethra, making it diﬃcult to
urinate when you’re very aroused. If you’ve ever tried to pee right after

[PDF page 40]

having an orgasm, you’ve confronted this directly—you have to take
deep, cleansing breaths to give your genitals time to relax.
In some women, the Skene’s glands produce ﬂuid, which is how some
women ejaculate. Female ejaculation—“squirting”—has gotten some
attention lately, in part because more science has been done and in part
because it’s been featured in porn. As a result, I get asked about it
pretty regularly. In fact, one day a couple of years ago I was visiting a
student residence hall to answer anonymous questions out of a box, only
to ﬁnd that one student had put in the question, “How do I learn to
squirt?” while another student had put in, “How do I stop squirting?”6
Needless to say, our culture sends mixed messages to women about
their genital ﬂuids . . . or their lack thereof. On the one hand, ejaculation
is viewed as a quintessentially masculine event and women’s genitals
are, ya know, shameful, so for a woman’s body to do something so
emphatic and wet is unacceptable. On the other hand, it’s a
comparatively rare event, and the perpetual pursuit of novelty, coupled
with basic supply-and-demand dynamics, means that the rare
commodity of a woman who ejaculates is prized and put on display. So
if they’re paying attention to cultural messages about ejaculation,
women are understandably confused.
The biological message is simple: Female ejaculation is a byproduct,
like male nipples and the hymen. No matter how big a deal culture
makes of it, women vary. One woman I know never ejaculated in her life
until shortly after menopause, when she got a new partner. All of a
sudden she was ejaculating a quarter of a cup of ﬂuid with every
orgasm. Was it the change in partner? Was it the hormonal shift of
menopause? None of the above? I have no idea.
But this brings me to an important point about genitals: They get wet
sometimes, and they have a fragrance. A scent. A rich and earthy
bouquet, redolent of grass and amber, with a hint of woody musk.
Genitals are aromatic, sometimes, and sticky sometimes, too. Your
genital secretions are probably diﬀerent at diﬀerent phases in your
menstrual cycle, and they change as you age, and they change with
your diet—women vary.
If you don’t ﬁnd the smell or sensation of genital wetness to be
completely beautiful and entrancing, that’s unsurprising given how we
teach people to feel about their genitals. But how you feel about your
genitals and their secretions is learned, and loving your body just as it is

[PDF page 41]

will give you more intense arousal and desire and bigger, better
orgasms. More on that in chapter 5.
intersex parts
Intersex folks,7 whose genitals are not obviously male or female at birth,
also have all the same parts; theirs happen to be organized somewhere
between the standard female and standard male conﬁgurations. The
size of the phallus, the location of the urethral opening, or the split of the
labioscrotal tissue may be anywhere in between.
Homology goes a long way in explaining how intersex genitals come
to be. People whose genitals are “somewhere in between” experienced
some slight variation in the hugely complex cascade of biochemical
events involved in the growth of a fetus, from egg fertilization through
embryonic development and gestation. This small change results in
slightly diﬀerent genitals. There’s nothing wrong with their genitals, any
more than there’s anything wrong with a person whose labia are
uniquely large or small.8 It’s still all the same parts, just organized in adiﬀerent way. For example, the male urethral opening may be anywhere
on the head of the penis; rarely, it is somewhere along the shaft of the
penis, but that too is just ﬁne, as long as it doesn’t impede urination or
cause chronic infection (which it usually does not). As long as the
genitals don’t cause pain and aren’t prone to infection or other medical
issues, they’re healthy and don’t require any kind of medical
intervention. We’re all made of the same parts, just organized in diﬀerent
ways.
This is why I don’t need to see your genitals to tell you that they’re
normal and healthy. You’ve got all the same parts, just organized in your
own unique way.
Like many sex educators, I include photographs of a variety of
vulvas in my anatomy lecture slides.
Where do I ﬁnd these photographs? On the Internet, of course.
My only diﬃculty is getting a diverse range—mostly I ﬁnd
images of the vulvas of young, thin, white, completely shaved
women. I have to search carefully to ﬁnd great sex-positive images
of the vulvas of older women, women of size, women of color, and
women who’ve got all their pubic hair.

[PDF page 42]

One day I was sitting around a busy comics convention talking
about this challenge with Camilla, who, like me, is a nerd and a
former college peer sex educator. Unlike me, she has a degree in
gender studies and studio art, is African American, and makes her
living as an illustrator—all of which gave her insight into my little
challenge.
She said, “Seriously, Emily? You’re googling, what, like, ‘black
vulva’? At work?”
I shrugged apologetically. “Sausages, laws, and sex education
lectures. You don’t want to know how any of them are made.”
And Camilla said, “Let me guess: All you ﬁnd is porny images,
nothing artistic or empowered or body positive?”
“And graphic medical pictures,” I said. “I tried searching
‘feminist vulvas of color,’ but all I got was embroidery projects from
Pinterest and Etsy.”
Camilla laughed at that, but said, “Now think if you were a
young woman trying to see what a normal, healthy vulva looks
like. If you’re white, you’re all set, Tumblr is full of those. But if
you’re Black or Asian or Latina, what is there? Porn and medical
pictures. What does that tell you?”
I said, “But I can’t say, ‘Hey, women of color, post more pictures
of your vulvas on the web, so that other women will know they’re
normal.’ ”
“No, but still,” Camilla said, “the images we see—or don’t see—
matter. You know those Escher girls?”
“No, what’s an Escher girl?”
“They’re the female characters in comics with abdomens so ﬂat
there’s no room for their internal organs, and their spines are
impossibly twisted so that you can see both boobs and both butt
cheeks at the same time. Their poses are so anatomically absurd
that they’re named after an artist famous for impossible illusions.”
“Sounds like some bad porn I’ve seen,” I said.
“Right,” said Camilla. “I saw those as a teenager and I felt like
that said everything about what a ‘female’ was supposed to be,
and because that wasn’t what being female felt like to me, I
decided my ﬁrst identity is ‘geek.’ Not woman, not Black: geek.
Gamer. It took a long time to integrate the other parts of my
identity, because I couldn’t see how they all ﬁt together. Images
matter. They tell us what’s possible, what things go together, what

[PDF page 43]

belongs and what doesn’t belong. And we’re all just trying to
belong somewhere.”
This statement was such a gift to me. I go back to this idea over
and over now, as I write my lectures. I spend hours searching the
Internet for sex-positive images of a wide variety of vulvas,
because my students vary—no two alike—and I want them to
know that their bodies are normal and that they belong there in my
classroom.
why it matters
Why might the seemingly simple fact that all human genitals are made of
the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways be the most important thing
you’ll ever learn about human sexuality?
Two reasons:
Because it means your genitals are normal—and not just normal, but
amazing and beautiful and captivating and delicious and enticing, on
down the alphabet, all the way to zesty—regardless of what they look
like. They are made of all the same parts as everyone else’s genitals,
organized in a conﬁguration utterly unique to you. The entire range is
normal. Beautiful. Perfect. And because it is true for each and every
facet of human sexual expression. As we’ll see in the chapters that
follow, from genital response to spanking fetishes, our sexual
physiology, psychology, and desires are all made of the same parts, just
organized in diﬀerent ways.
If we embrace this simple, profound idea—all the same parts,
organized in diﬀerent ways—it answers that ever-popular question: Are
men’s and women’s sexualities the same, or are they diﬀerent?
Answer: Yes.
They’re made of the same parts, organized diﬀerently.
While we can see obvious group diﬀerences when we look at
populations—male and female bodies—there’s at least as much
variability within those groups as there is between those groups.
I can illustrate with a nonsex example. The average height of an adult
woman is ﬁve feet four and the average height of an adult man is ﬁve
feet ten, a six-inch diﬀerence between the two groups’ averages. But
height varies more within each group than between the groups. If you
measured the heights of a thousand random people—ﬁve hundred men

[PDF page 44]

and ﬁve hundred women—you’d ﬁnd that nearly all the women would be
between ﬁve feet and ﬁve feet eight—an eight-inch diﬀerence within the
group—and nearly all the men would be between ﬁve feet four and six
feet four—a twelve-inch diﬀerence. Notice three things: There’s more
diﬀerence within each group (eight or twelve inches) than between the
two groups (six inches); there are four inches of overlap between the
groups; and one or two hundred people among the thousand would be
outside even these wide ranges!9
The same goes for sex. Within each group we ﬁnd a vast range of
diversity—and I don’t mean just anatomically. I mean in sexual
orientation, sexual preferences, gender identity and expression, and—
the subject of the rest of this book—sexual functioning: arousal, desire,
and orgasm. We also ﬁnd overlap between the two groups, and we ﬁnd
folks who vary wildly from the “average” while still being perfectly normal
and healthy.
Some authors argue that the diﬀerences between men and women
are more important than the similarities. Others say that the similarities
are more important than the diﬀerences. My view is that the basic fact of
homology—all the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways—is more
important than either.
And variety may be the one and only truly universal characteristic of
human sexuality. From our bodies to our desires to our behaviors, there
are as many “sexualities” as there are humans alive on Earth. No two
alike.
Here’s the kind of conversation you have when you’re a sex
educator out drinking with your friends:
Laurie: “This woman I know told me if she ever has kids, she’ll
have plastic surgery on her ladybusiness right after she gives
birth, because she thinks it won’t look good anymore.”
Camilla: “Did you tell her that the cosmetic medical-industrial
complex paid a lot of money to make sure she felt that way about
her body, so that they could proﬁt from her needless self-
criticism?”
Laurie: “No, I told her that once you have kids, your partner is
just glad if they ever get to see your business, whatever it looks
like.”
Emily: “Let’s invent a ritual where women celebrate the transition
into their postpartum bodies. I mean, it’s not just its appearance

[PDF page 45]

that changes, it’s what your body means, to yourself and to the
world.”
Laurie was the only mom in the group, and she was the only
one who didn’t look at me like I was on drugs. She said, “I totally
want a ritual. Anything to make it easier to live in a body that feels
like a deﬂated balloon.”
“But you’re so beautiful!” everyone said instantly.
The compliments to Laurie’s indisputable beauty ﬂowed even
faster than the wine, but a few days later, Laurie told me that was
the opposite of what she needed.
“What I need is to hear that it’s okay to feel sad that my body
will never be what it used to be. I put a lot of eﬀort into learning to
love that body, and now I’ve got to start all over again learning to
love this one.”
So I said, “It’s okay to feel sad that your body has permanently
changed.”
Laurie burst into tears—which is something she does a lot
lately, sudden quiet little storms that pass through her anytime she
ﬁnds herself on the receiving end of the aﬀection and attention she
lavishes on others.
“It shouldn’t even be about whether I like my body or not,” she
sniﬀed. “That’s really what changed after I had Trev. Now it should
really be about whether or not it does what I need it to do.”
By “what she needs it to do,” Laurie means giving birth—at
home, squatting in the tub, like a boss—breast-feeding for more
than a year, and never sleeping more than four hours in a row for
almost three years. The statement “Trevor is a bad sleeper”
doesn’t even begin to cover the dark circles under Laurie’s eyes.
Laurie’s body is amazing.
But she doesn’t feel that way.
The notion of “all the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways” is
as true for the ways a woman’s body changes over the course of
her life as it is for the ways people’s genitals vary. And just as
everyone’s genitals are normal and beautiful, so all women’s
bodies are normal and beautiful.
But mostly that’s not what women are taught. Mostly we’re
taught that our bodies are supposed to be one speciﬁc shape,
otherwise there’s something wrong with us. I’ll talk about that—and
how to overcome it—in chapter 5.

[PDF page 46]

change how you see10
I realize that just saying, “Your genitals are perfect and beautiful,” won’t
change anything if you feel uncomfortable with your genitals, but if
seeing the beauty of your unique and healthy genitals is something you
struggle with, there are two things I’d like you to do:
1. Get a hand mirror and look at your vulva, as I described earlier in the chapter. As you
look, make note of all the things you like about what you see. Write them down. You’ll
notice that your brain tries to list all the things you don’t like, but don’t include those. Do it
again every week. Or twice a week. Or more. Each time, the things you like will become a
little more salient and the noise will get a little quieter. Maybe even consider telling
someone else about what you see and what you like. Better still, tell someone who also did
the exercise!
It’s an activity that gets labeled cognitive dissonance because it forces us to be
aware of good things, when mostly we tend to be aware of the “negative” things. Try
it.
2. Ask your partner, if you have one, to have a close look. Turn on the light, take oﬀ your
clothes, get on your back, and let them look. Ask them what they see, how they feel about
it, what memories they have of your vulva. Let your partner know what you’ve felt worried
about, and ask for help to see what they see. Listen with your heart, not with your fear.
a better metaphor
We started this chapter thinking about the ways we metaphorize
anatomy, creating meaning from random acts of biology in ways that
end up making us feel uncomfortable with our bodies. To help undo all
that, I like to use a diﬀerent metaphor: a garden. It’s a metaphor I use a
lot—remember the apple tree from the introduction?—because it oﬀers
a judgment-free way of thinking about how the sexual hardware we’re
born with (our bodies and brains) and the families and culture we’re
born into, interact to give rise to the individual sexual self that emerges
in adulthood.
It goes like this: On the day you’re born, you’re given a little plot of rich
and fertile soil, slightly diﬀerent from everyone else’s. And right away,
your family and your culture start to plant things and tend the garden for
you, until you’re old enough to take over its care yourself. They plant
language and attitudes and knowledge about love and safety and

[PDF page 47]

bodies and sex. And they teach you how to tend your garden, because
as you transition through adolescence into adulthood, you’ll take on full
responsibility for its care.
And you didn’t choose any of that. You didn’t choose your plot of land,
the seeds that were planted, or the way your garden was tended in the
early years of your life.
As you reach adolescence, you begin to take care of the garden on
your own. And you may ﬁnd that your family and culture have planted
some beautiful, healthy things that are thriving in a well-tended garden.
And you may notice some things you want to change. Maybe the
strategies you were taught for cultivating the garden are ineﬃcient, so
you need to ﬁnd diﬀerent ways of taking care of it so that it will thrive
(that’s in chapter 3). Maybe the seeds that were planted were not the
kind of thing that will thrive in your particular garden, so you need to ﬁnd
something that’s a better ﬁt for you (that’s in chapters 4 and 5).
Some of us get lucky with our land and what gets planted. We have
healthy and thriving gardens from the earliest moments of our
awareness. And some of us get stuck with some pretty toxic crap in our
gardens, and we’re left with the task of uprooting all the junk and
replacing it with something healthier, something we choose for
ourselves.
Your physical body—including your genitals—is one part of the basic
hardware of your sexuality, the plot of land. Your brain and your
environment are the rest of the hardware, and they’re the subject of
chapters 2 and 3.
What It Is, Not What It Means
Olivia used her idea about her hormones, her “masculine”
genitals, and her high sexual interest as a shield against the
cultural criticisms that said she was . . . well, all kinds of things for
which she “ought to be ashamed.” A slut. A nymphomaniac. Trying
to “get attention,” “get a man,” or “control people” with her body—
none of which were true, but all of which had been ﬂung at her at
various times in her life. The world had tried to convince her that
her sexuality was toxic, dangerous to both herself and the people
around her.

[PDF page 48]

She had fought hard against these messages, in defense of her
own sexual wellbeing. The shield of, “It’s my hormones, so it’s
natural,” was an important part of that defense.
But as she absorbed the idea of “all the same parts, organized
in diﬀerent ways,” she didn’t need the shield anymore. She
realized that the shield was actually blocking her oﬀ from other
people, while “all the same parts” actively connected her with other
people—it meant she wasn’t diﬀerent or separate. She was the
same—unique, but still connected in the continuum of human
sexuality.
This is what science can do for us, if we let it. It oﬀers us an
opportunity to lower our defenses and experience the ways that
we are all connected.
I know for a fact that Olivia was not born feeling uncomfortable with
her genitals or her sexuality, and neither were you. When you were born,
you were deeply, gloriously satisﬁed with each and every part of your
body. But decades of sex-negative culture have let in weeds of
dissatisfaction. Chapters 3 and 4 explain precisely how this can
inﬂuence your sexual wellbeing, and chapter 5 describes how to undo
that process and get back to living wholly inside your body, to return to
that state you were born into, of deep, warm aﬀection for and curiosity
about your own body.
But before we get there, let’s spend a chapter talking about the
biggest of all your sex organs and how it, too, is made of all the same
parts as everyone else’s but organized in a unique way.
I refer, of course, to your brain.
tl;dr
• Everyone’s genitals are made of the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways. No two
alike.
• Are you experiencing pain? If so, talk to a medical provider. If not, then your genitals are
normal and healthy and beautiful and perfect just as they are.
• The genitals you see in soft-core porn images may have been digitally altered to appear
more “tucked in”; don’t let that fool you into believing that all vulvas look that way.
• Find a mirror (or use the self-portrait camera on your phone) and actually look at your
clitoris. Knowing where the clitoris is, is important, but knowing where your clitoris is, is

[PDF page 49]

power.

[PDF page 50]

two
the dual control model
YOUR SEXUAL PERSONALITY
Laurie hadn’t actually wanted sex with her husband, Johnny—I
mean, really craved it—since before their son Trev was born. At
ﬁrst she ﬁgured it was the pregnancy. Then she ﬁgured it was a
postpartum thing.
Then she ﬁgured she was just tired.
Or depressed.
Or maybe she didn’t actually love her husband.
Or maybe she was broken.
Or maybe humans just aren’t meant to stay erotically connected
after the months of cleaning baby puke oﬀ each other’s shirts.
They’d had a great run. Right up until she got pregnant, their
sex life was the kind of thing you ﬁnd in romance novels—hot,
hungry, passionate, sweet, loving, and just kinky enough to give
them something wicked to think about as they locked eyes over
his parents’ Thanksgiving dinner table.
So maybe that was all they got. Maybe the rest of their lives
would be sexless.
Still, they’d been trying. They’d bought some toys and massage
oil. They’d tried tying her up, tying him up, using ﬂavored lube,
videoing themselves, playing games . . . and sometimes it worked,
all this exploration.
But mostly it didn’t. Mostly Laurie wound up feeling sad and
lonely because she loved Johnny, loved him so much it hurt, yet
she couldn’t make herself want him, not even with all the novelty
and adventure available to them in a twenty-ﬁrst-century world of
technology, fantasy, and permissiveness.

[PDF page 51]

One side beneﬁt of this whole situation was that Laurie found
she could have an orgasm in about ﬁve minutes with the vibrator,
and that made falling asleep easier. So she’d go to bed early and
buzz herself to sleep. But she hid it from Johnny, because she
was pretty sure he’d be unhappy to learn that she was having
orgasm on her own but not with him. It puzzled her, this interest in
solo orgasm, when hardly anything could prompt her to want sex
with her husband.
So she felt stuck and confused and crazy when she sat down to
talk with me about it.
Her perception of the situation—and her sense of hopelessness
—changed completely when she learned what’s in this chapter:
Your sexual brain has an “accelerator” that responds to sexual
stimulation, but it also has “brakes,” which respond to all the very
good reasons not to be turned on right now.
Imagine it’s 1964 and you’re working in the laboratory of
groundbreaking sex researchers William Masters and Virginia Johnson,
at Washington University in St. Louis. You’re on the cutting edge of
science, working to understand what has never been studied before,
and you spend a lot of time posting want ads in the local paper. You’re
looking for people, ordinary people, who are not only willing but also
able to have orgasm in a laboratory (“research quarters”) while
connected to machines that measure their heart rate, blood pressure,
blood ﬂow, and genital response, with you and the team of scientists in
the room, observing.
When a woman responds to the ad, you invite her to the lab, where
you take a detailed medical and sexual history, you conduct a physical
exam to check for any health issues, and you introduce her to the
research quarters and its equipment. Next time she comes in, she
practices having an orgasm in the research quarters, ﬁrst on her own
and then with the research team there in the room with her.
Now she’ll be observed, measured, and assessed as she stimulates
herself with the equipment in the research quarters, all the way to
orgasm. For science.
This is what you’ll observe:
Excitement. As stimulation begins, her heart rate, blood pressure, and
respiration rate increase, and her labia minora and the clitoris darken
and swell, separating the outer labia. The walls of the vagina begin to

[PDF page 52]

lubricate and then lengthen. Her breasts swell and the nipples become
erect. Late in excitement, she may begin to sweat.
Plateau. Lubrication begins at the mouth of the vagina, from the
Bartholin’s glands. Her breasts continue to swell, so much that the
nipples seem to retract into the breasts. She may experience “sex
ﬂush,” a concentration of color over the chest. By now her inner labia
have doubled in size from their resting state. The internal structures of
the clitoris lift, drawing the external portion up and inward, so that it
retracts from the surface of the body. The vagina itself “tents” around
the cervix, open and wide deep inside the body. She experiences the
involuntary muscle contraction known as myotonia, including carpopedal
spasms (contraction of muscles in the hands and feet). She may begin
to pant or hold her breath, as the thoracic and pelvic diaphragms
contract in unison.
Orgasm. All the sphincters of her pelvic diaphragm (the “Kegel”
muscle) contract in unison—urethra, vagina, and anus. She experiences
rapid breathing, rapid heartbeat, and increased blood pressure. Her
pelvis may rock, various muscle groups may tighten involuntarily. She
experiences the sudden release of the tension that has accumulated in
the muscles throughout her body.
Resolution. Breasts return to baseline, clitoris and labia return to
baseline, heart rate, respiration rate, blood pressure all return to
baseline.
This four-phase model of sexual response quickly became the
foundation of sex therapists’, educators’, and researchers’
understanding of the human sexual response. As the ﬁrst scientiﬁc
description of the physiology of sexual response, it would become the
basis for deﬁning sexual health and also sexual problems.
Now imagine you’re a sex therapist in the 1970s, using the four-phase
model to understand and treat clients with sexual dysfunction. Some of
them you can help. Clients with anorgasmia (lack of orgasm) can learn
to have orgasms, those with premature ejaculation can learn to control
orgasm, those with vaginismus (vaginal spasms) can learn to relax
those muscles. But there’s a group of clients who just don’t seem to
respond to therapy informed by the four-phase model.
This is what happened to psychotherapist Helen Singer Kaplan.
Reviewing treatment failures among her own and her colleagues’
patients, she found that the clients with the least successful outcomes
were those who lacked interest in sex. Kaplan realized something

[PDF page 53]

important was entirely missing from the four-phase model: desire. The
entire concept of sexual desire was utterly missing from the dominant
theory of human sexual response.
It seems like a glaring oversight in retrospect, but of course it was
missing—people who come to a laboratory to masturbate for science
don’t have to want sex before they begin; they just have to get aroused
for the purpose of the experiment.
So Kaplan took the four-phase model out of the laboratory and
adapted it to the lived experience of her clients. Her “triphasic” model of
the sexual response cycle begins with desire, which she conceptualized
as “interest in” or “appetite for” sex, much like hunger or thirst. The
second phase is arousal, which combines excitement and plateau into
one phase, and the third phase is orgasm.
For decades, Kaplan’s new triphasic model of sexual response
served as the foundation for diagnostic criteria in the American
Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual. You could
have normal or problematic desire, normal or problematic arousal, and
normal or problematic orgasm. A number of these diagnoses now have
eﬀective treatments, including cognitive-behavioral therapy,
mindfulness, sensorimotor therapies, and pharmaceuticals.
Fast-forward to 1998. Viagra: a pill that gives men erections.
Now imagine you’re a researcher for a pharmaceutical company.
Erectile dysfunction drugs have hit it big and the pressure is on to ﬁnd a
“pink Viagra,” a drug that can do for women what Viagra does for men.
You try giving Viagra to women—it doesn’t work. You test testosterone
and estrogen—it works for only a small minority of women. You try
antidepressants—nothing.
And today, nearly two decades later, pharmaceutical companies are
still looking for this “pink Viagra.” If any drug worked for women, it would
be a commercial bonanza—imagine being able to take a pill and just
want sex, without eﬀort, without hassle. It’s such a tantalizing idea that,
despite lacking approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
the pharmaceutical company Pﬁzer spent tons of money promoting oﬀ-
label use of Viagra in women; the idea took oﬀ, with experts on Oprah
and an entire story line (suspiciously similar to a product placement . . .)
in Sex and the City, just for a start.1
But, as I said, these medications don’t work on women.
Just as Kaplan looked at sex therapy treatment failures and found a
missing piece—desire—in the Masters and Johnson model, we can look

[PDF page 54]

at the failure of the pharmaceutical industry to ﬁnd a medication for
women’s sexual functioning and ﬁnd a missing piece in the Kaplan
model.
This chapter introduces that missing piece.
In the ﬁrst section of the chapter, I’ll describe the basic theory of the
“dual control model” of sexual response, which proposes a sexual
“accelerator” and sexual “brakes.” The brake is the missing piece, the
reason these drugs don’t work on women. And like desire, once
someone points it out, it’s obvious  . . . and it changes your entire
understanding of how sex works.
In the second section of this chapter, I’ll talk about individual
diﬀerences in the sensitivity of the brake and accelerator. This variation
impacts how a person responds to the sexual world. We’ll ﬁnd that while,
yes, as you’d expect, men often have more sensitive accelerators and
women have more sensitive brakes, there’s far more variation within
those groups than between them. What’s more interesting than just how
sensitive the mechanisms are is how these mechanisms relate to your
mood and to your environment.
And that’s what the third section is about: what the brakes and
accelerator respond to. What on earth is a “sexually relevant stimulus”?
What kind of “potential threat” causes our brains to hit the brakes? How
does our brain know what to respond to and what not to respond to?
And can we change that?
I bet that before you picked up this book, you already knew that
female genitals include a vagina and a clitoris, and you already knew
that arousal, desire, and orgasm are things people generally experience
as part of sexual response. Once you’ve read this chapter, I want you to
feel that your accelerator and your brakes are as basic, as integral to
your sexual functioning, as your clitoris and your desire. If I do my job in
the next few pages, you’ll be telling everyone you know: “OMG,
everybody, there’s a brake!”
The Power of Context
Erectile dysfunction drugs don’t improve women’s sexual functioning, but they do have
one of the strongest placebo eﬀects observed in medical research. Around 40 percent of
participants in the placebo group of a clinical trial of sexual dysfunction medication report
that the “drug”—actually a sugar pill—improved their sex lives; this is a response size so
large that one particularly brilliant study reported only the eﬀects of an eight-week

[PDF page 55]

“treatment” with a placebo.2 This is just one small hint at the power of context in shaping
our sexual experience, which we’ll discuss in chapter 3.
turn on the ons, turn oﬀ the oﬀs
Allow me to introduce you to the dual control model.
Developed in the late 1990s by Erick Janssen and John Bancroft at
the Kinsey Institute, the dual control model of sexual response goes far
beyond earlier models of human sexuality, by describing not just “what
happens” during arousal—erection, lubrication, etc.—but also the
central mechanism that governs sexual arousal, which controls how and
when you respond to sexually relevant sights, sounds, sensations, and
ideas.3
The more I learned about the dual control model during my graduate
education, the more I felt the lights come on in my understanding of
human sexuality. I’ve been teaching it to my students for more than a
decade now, and the more I teach it, the more I see how valuable it is in
helping people to understand their own sexual functioning.
Here’s how it works:
Your central nervous system (your brain and spinal cord) is made up
of a series of partnerships of accelerator and brakes—like the pairing of
your sympathetic nervous system (“accelerator”) and your
parasympathetic nervous system (“brake”). The core insight of the dual
control model is that what’s true for other aspects of the nervous system
must also be true for the brain system that coordinates sex: a sexual
accelerator and sexual brake. (Daniel Kahneman wrote of his own Nobel
Prize–winning research in economics, “You know you have made a
theoretical advance when you can no longer reconstruct why you failed
for so long to see the obvious.” So it was with Kahneman’s prospect
theory, and so it is with the dual control model. I stand ready to send
Erick and John large fruit baskets on the day the Nobel committee gets
its act together and recognizes the importance of their insight.) So the
dual control model of sexual response, as the name implies, consists of
two parts:
Sexual Excitation System (SES). This is the accelerator of your
sexual response. It receives information about sexually relevant stimuli
in the environment—things you see, hear, smell, touch, taste, or imagine
—and sends signals from the brain to the genitals to tell them, “Turn

[PDF page 56]

on!” SES is constantly scanning your context (including your own
thoughts and feelings) for things that are sexually relevant. It is always at
work, far below the level of consciousness. You aren’t aware that it’s
there until you ﬁnd yourself turned on and pursuing sexual pleasure.
Sexual Inhibition System (SIS). This is your sexual brake. “Inhibition”
here doesn’t mean “shyness” but rather neurological “oﬀ” signals.
Research has found that there are actually two brakes, reﬂecting the
diﬀerent functions of an inhibitory system. One brake works in much the
same way as the accelerator. It notices all the potential threats in the
environment—everything you see, hear, smell, touch, taste, or imagine
—and sends signals saying, “Turn oﬀ!” It’s like the foot brake in a car,
responding to stimuli in the moment. Just as the accelerator scans the
environment for turn-ons, the brake scans for anything your brain
interprets as a good reason not to be aroused right now—risk of STI
transmission, unwanted pregnancy, social consequences, etc. And all
day long it sends a steady stream of “Turn oﬀ!” messages. This brake is
responsible for preventing us from getting inappropriately aroused in the
middle of a business meeting or at dinner with our family. It’s also the
system that throws the Oﬀ switch if, say, in the middle of some nookie,
your grandmother walks in the room.
The second brake is a little diﬀerent. It’s more like the hand brake in a
car, a chronic, low-level “No thank you” signal. If you try to drive with the
hand brake on, you might be able to get where you want to go, but it’ll
take longer and use a lot more gas. Where the foot brake is associated
with “fear of performance consequences,” the hand brake is associated
with “fear of performance failure,” like worry about not having an
orgasm.
For the rest of the book, I’ll be referring to the brakes generally,
without diﬀerentiating between the two kinds, because it turns out that,
so far, eﬀective strategies for turning oﬀ the brakes aren’t diﬀerent
depending on which brake is being hit. Over the next ten years we might
develop behavioral strategies or even medications that target a speciﬁc
system, but in the meantime, you don’t need to know for sure which
brake is being hit in order to ﬁgure out how to stop hitting it.
•  •  •
In essence, that’s all the dual control model is: the brakes and the
accelerator. The details are more complex, but the implications of even
this basic idea are powerful, because you can immediately
conceptualize all sexual functioning—and all sexual dysfunction—as a

[PDF page 57]

balance (or imbalance) between brakes and accelerator. If you’re
having trouble with any phase of sexual response, is it because there’s
not enough stimulation to the accelerator? Or is there too much
stimulation to the brakes? Indeed, a common mistake made by people
who are struggling with orgasm or desire is assuming that the problem is
lack of accelerator; it’s more likely that the problem is too much brake
(more on that in chapters 7 and 8). And once you know whether it’s a
problem with the accelerator or the brakes, you can ﬁgure out how to
create change.
When Olivia (the exuberant masturbator) answered my “excitors”
questions [in the worksheets on this page] with, “I can feel turned
on doing the dishes,” I had a pretty good idea what her sexual
brain was like.
She told me, “I love sex. I love my partner. I love trying new
things, new places, new positions, new toys, new porn, new
everything. I’m One Big Yes.” And I could see it in her face: the
joy, the conﬁdence of a woman living fully inside her body.
I asked, “Have you sometimes done things and then thought,
‘Why did I do that?’ ”
She winced and nodded. “That’s happened. Rarely, but . . .
when I get super stressed, I’ll just go out and be like, ‘Whatever.
Go.’ I’ve done some stupid shit.”
“And are there times when you feel like you need to masturbate
several times a day?” I asked, and she blinked at me like she
wondered if I had a camera in her bedroom.
“Usually I can ignore it,” she said. “But every once in a while it
just makes me crazy. It’s like having an itch that no amount of
scratching will help. I have this out-of-control feeling.”
“Yeah,” I said. “A sensitive accelerator can make people more
prone to risk taking and compulsivity—that ‘out-of-control’ feeling.”
“That’s why? A sensitive accelerator?” she said. “I’m not high
testosterone, I’m high SES?”
“It would explain both your ‘One Big Yes’ and the occasional
out-of-control feeling.”
It’s easy to assume that having a sensitive accelerator is fun—
and it can be, in the right context. Olivia has a partner she delights
in and a wide-open attitude that allows her to explore without
worry or fear. She dives right in. And then sometimes, especially

[PDF page 58]

when she’s stressed or anxious, Olivia said, “It can feel like my
sex drive is constantly demanding my attention and won’t leave
me alone.”
There’s another level, too, to the risks that can accompany a
sensitive accelerator. Because she sometimes feels like her own
sexuality is bossing her around, Olivia ﬁnds herself worried that
she, in turn, is bossing her partner around, being too pushy, too
demanding, too sexual, just plain too much.
“I have to wield my powerful sexuality carefully, for the
betterment of humanity,” she announced—mostly kidding.
Mostly.
arousability
According to the dual control model, arousal is really two processes:
activating the accelerator and deactivating the brakes. So your level of
sexual arousal at any given moment is the product of how much
stimulation the accelerator is getting and how little stimulation the brakes
are getting.
But it’s also a product of how sensitive your brakes and accelerator
are to that stimulation.
SIS and SES are traits. We all have them and they’re more or less
stable over the life span, but, like introversion/extroversion, they vary
from individual to individual. Just as we all have phalluses and urethras
(as we saw in chapter 1), we all have a sexual accelerator and sexual
brakes in our central nervous systems (we’re all the same!). But we all
have diﬀerent sensitivities of SIS and SES (we’re all diﬀerent!), which
leads to diﬀerent arousability—the potential to be aroused.
Some people are high on both SIS and SES, others are low on both,
some have high SIS but low SES, and some have high SES but low SIS.
And most of us are average. The variation is distributed on a nice bell
curve; the majority of people are heaped up in the middle and a few
people are at the extreme ends.
Let’s take a look at what happens if brake or accelerator is especially
sensitive (or not).
Suppose you’re high on SES and low on SIS—sensitive accelerator
and hardly any brakes. What kind of sexual response do you have?

[PDF page 59]

You respond readily to sexually relevant stimuli but not to potential
threats, so you’re easily aroused and have a diﬃcult time preventing
arousal. Which isn’t always as fun as it might sound, and it can, under
some circumstances, lead to compulsive sexual behavior.
The sensitive accelerator plus not-so-sensitive brakes combination
describes between 2 and 6 percent of women,4 and it’s associated with
sexual risk taking and compulsivity. Because the brain mechanism
responsible for noticing sexually relevant stimuli is very sensitive, you’re
highly motivated to pursue sex, and because the brain mechanism
responsible for stopping you from doing things you know you shouldn’t
do is only minimally functional, you may sometimes feel out of control of
your sexuality, especially when you’re stressed. You’re likely to have
more partners, use less protection, and feel less in control. You might
also be more likely to want sex when you are stressed (“redliners”),
whereas other women are likely to ﬁnd that their interest in sex
plummets when they’re stressed (“ﬂatliners”).
What if you have the opposite combination—sensitive brakes plus
not-so-sensitive accelerator? This describes about 1 to 4 percent of
women and is associated with diﬃculty getting aroused, lack of interest
or desire, and problems with orgasm. If you have sensitive brakes,
you’re very responsive to all the reasons not to be aroused, and if you
have a relatively insensitive accelerator, it takes a lot of concentration
and deliberate attention to tune in to sex.
A sensitive brake, regardless of the accelerator, is the strongest
predictor of sexual problems of all kinds. In a 2008 survey of 226 women
age eighteen to eighty-one, low interest in sex, arousal diﬃculties, and
orgasm diﬃculty, were signiﬁcantly correlated with inhibition factors,
especially “arousal contingency” (“Unless things are ‘just right’ it is
diﬃcult for me to become sexually aroused”) and concerns about sexual
function (“If I am worried about taking too long to become aroused or to
orgasm, this can interfere with my arousal”).5
You can complete the Sexual Temperament Questionnaire that
follows to get an idea of how sensitive your own brakes and accelerator
are. Don’t mistake this for actual science. It’s intended to guide you in
your understanding of how your internal sexual response mechanism
may inﬂuence your response to sexual stimulation, but it is just an
approximation.6 Recall, especially, that there are actually two diﬀerent
brakes—some people’s arousal is shut down more because of internal
fears (e.g., taking too long to become aroused) and others are more

[PDF page 60]

aﬀected by fears about external factors (e.g., getting an STI or getting
caught having sex). Both can decrease your arousal, or prevent you
from becoming aroused in the ﬁrst place.
sexual temperament questionnaire
Inhibitors (SIS)
Circle the number of the answer that best describes you.
Unless things are “just right,” it is diﬃcult for me to become sexually
aroused.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
When I am sexually aroused, the slightest thing can turn me oﬀ.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
I have to trust a partner to become fully aroused.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
If I am worried about taking too long to become aroused or to orgasm,
this can interfere with my arousal.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
Sometimes I feel so “shy” or self-conscious during sex that I cannot
become fully aroused.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me

[PDF page 61]

Total (out of 20) ____
Excitors (SES)
Circle the number of the answer that best describes you.
Often, just how someone smells can be a turn-on.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
Seeing my partner doing something that shows their talent or
intelligence, or watching them interacting well with others can make me
very sexually aroused.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
Having sex in a diﬀerent setting than usual is a real turn-on for me.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
When I think about someone I ﬁnd sexually attractive or when I fantasize
about sex, I easily become sexually aroused.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
Certain hormonal changes (e.g., my menstrual cycle) deﬁnitely increase
my sexual arousal.
0 1 2 3 4
Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
I get very turned on when someone wants me sexually.
0 1 2 3 4

[PDF page 62]

Not at all like meNot much like meSomewhat like meA lot like meExactly like me
Total (out of 24) ____
Scoring
Low SIS (0–6)
You’re not so sensitive to all the reasons not to be sexually aroused. You
tend not to worry about your own sexual functioning, and body image
issues don’t interfere too much with your sexuality. When you’re sexually
engaged, your attention is not very distractible, and you aren’t inclined to
describe yourself as “sexually shy.” Most circumstances can be sexual
for you. You may ﬁnd that your main challenge around sexual functioning
is holding yourself back, reining yourself in. Staying aware of potential
consequences can help with this. Around 15 percent of the women I’ve
asked are in this range.
Medium SIS (7–13)
You’re right in the middle, along with more than half the women I’ve
asked. This means that whether your sexual brakes engage is largely
dependent on context. Risky or novel situations, such as a new partner,
might increase your concerns about your own sexual functioning,
shyness, or distractibility from sex. Contexts that easily arouse you are
likely to be low risk and more familiar, and anytime your stress levels—
including anxiety, overwhelm, and exhaustion—escalate, your brakes
will reduce your interest in and response to sexual signals.
High SIS (14–20)
You’re pretty sensitive to all the reasons not to be sexually aroused. You
need a setting of trust and relaxation in order to be aroused, and it’s
best if you don’t feel rushed or pressured in any way. You might be
easily distracted from sex. High SIS, regardless of SES, is the most
strongly correlated factor with sexual problems, so if this is you, pay
close attention to the “sexy contexts” worksheets in the chapters that
follow. About a quarter of the women I’ve asked fall into this range.
Low SES (0–7)

[PDF page 63]

You’re not so sensitive to sexually relevant stimuli and need to make a
more deliberate eﬀort to tune your attention in that direction. Novel
situations are less likely than familiar ones to be sexy to you. Your sexual
functioning will beneﬁt from increasing stimulation (for instance, using a
vibrator) and daily practice of paying attention to sensations. Lower SES
is also associated with asexuality, so if you’re very low SES, you might
resonate with some components of the asexual identity. The women I
ask are probably higher SES than the overall population—they’re
interested enough in sex to take a class, attend a workshop, or read a
sex blog—but still about 8 percent of those women fall into this range.
Medium SES (8–15)
You’re right in the middle, so whether you’re sensitive to sexual stimuli
probably depends on the context. In situations of high romance or
eroticism, you tune in readily to sexual stimuli; in situations of low
romance or eroticism, it may be pretty challenging to move your
attention to sexual things. Recognize the role that context plays in your
arousal and pleasure, and take steps to increase the sexiness of your
life’s contexts. Seventy percent of the women I’ve asked fall into this
range.
High SES (16–24)
You’re pretty sensitive to sexually relevant stimuli, maybe even to things
most of us aren’t generally very sensitive to, like smell and taste. A fairly
wide range of contexts can be sexual for you, and novelty may be really
exciting. You may like having sex as a way to de-stress—higher SES is
correlated with greater risk for sexual compulsivity, so you may want to
pay attention to the ways you manage stress. Make sure you create lots
of time and space for your partner; because you’re sensitive, you can
derive intense satisfaction from your partner’s pleasure, so you’ll both
beneﬁt! About 16 percent of the women I ask fall into this group.
What “Medium” Means
Did you score right in the middle on both? More than half of people do.
Scoring very high or very low on these traits is comparatively rare, so for
the majority of people the value of the dual control model lies not in the

[PDF page 64]

discovery that, “Wow, my brain is extra sensitive/not sensitive to this
kind of stimulation, so I need to pay attention to that!” The value instead
lies in the insight that the brakes and the accelerator are two separate
systems. Some things in the world activate your accelerator, which
makes you all sticky and eager. Other things hit your brakes and slow
down your arousal process. Some things even hit both at once! One
blog reader emailed me that “brakes and accelerator at the same time”
exactly described her experience while reading the best-selling sexually
explicit novel Fifty Shades of Grey.
Medium means you can say to yourself, “Hey, I’m normal!” and start
thinking about what hits your brakes or activates your accelerator, and
how to recalibrate your life to suit your brain. I’ll discuss how to do that in
chapters 3, 4, and 5.
If you scored high or low on either scale—especially if your score is at
an extreme end—you can say to yourself, “Hey, I’m normal and also
comparatively rare!” And as you consider what engages your brakes
and accelerator, you’ll begin to realize that you relate to the sexual world
around you in ways most other women don’t experience.
Camilla, the artist, is smart—smart and curious. One of the things
she’s curious about is sex. She doesn’t just read books about it;
she reads the original research.
And she has struggled to reconcile her intellectual hunger for
knowledge about sex with her contrastingly small desire to actually
have any sex. That day when we were talking about images of
women, she mentioned this puzzle, especially noting that she
never seemed to experience “out of the blue” desire.
I wondered if she might have a sensitive brake, so I asked her
“inhibitors” questions: Do things have to be “just right” in order for
you to get aroused? Do you need total trust in your partner? Do
you worry about sex while you’re having it?
Not really, not really, and not really.
Then I asked “excitors” questions. Do you sometimes get
aroused just by watching your partner do something (nonsexual)
that he’s good at, or by his smell, or when you feel sexually
“wanted”? Are you aroused by new situations? Do you get turned
on by fantasies?
Not really, heck no, and . . . what fantasies?

[PDF page 65]

Camilla’s low SES. This doesn’t mean she’s not interested in the
idea of sex; it means her body requires a bunch of stimulation in
order to cross the threshold into active desire for sex.
I asked about orgasm.
“Few in number and slow to come,” she said, “and they don’t
often seem worth the eﬀort.” She ﬁnds she’s most reliably
orgasmic with a vibrator, and that makes perfect sense—
mechanical vibration can provide an intensity of stimulation that no
organic stimulation can match. But for her, orgasm is sometimes
more of a distraction than a goal with sex. She loves being with
her partner, she loves playing and exploring. But sometimes she’s
just as happy cooking with him as having sex.
“Henry isn’t the most sexually driven guy in the world,” she said.
(Henry is her husband. He’s a super-nice guy.) “But he’d love it if I
initiated sex a little more often. Is this something a person can
change?”
Yes it is.
Part of Camilla’s solution is in chapter 3, but we’ll have to wait
until chapter 7 to get to the heart of it.
diﬀerent for girls . . . but not necessarily
If you had to guess which group, men or women, has higher SES on
average—a more sensitive accelerator—which would you pick?
Men, right? Yep. At the population level, on average, men have a
more sensitive accelerator.7
And which group has higher SIS—more sensitive brakes?
Uh-huh. Women, on average, tend to have more sensitive brakes.
But remember from chapter 1 how height varies between men and
women, but it varies more within each group than between the groups?
Women in particular vary from one another in terms of their brakes and
accelerator. A lot. Ask a thousand women how often they would ideally
like to have sex and their answers will range from never to ﬁve times a
day, and all of those answers are normal.
A more important diﬀerence than simply the sensitivity of the
accelerators and brakes of men and women is the relationships of these
two mechanisms with other aspects of men’s and women’s
psychologies—especially mood and anxiety.

[PDF page 66]

For example, about 10 to 20 percent of both men and women report
an increase in their sexual interest when they’re anxious or depressed.8
But a guy who wants sex more when he’s anxious or depressed
probably has less sensitive brakes. In contrast, a woman who wants sex
more when she’s anxious or depressed is likely to have a more sensitive
accelerator.
What this shows us is that there’s more than just a population-level
diﬀerence in the average sensitivities of SIS and SES between men and
women; there also seem to be a diﬀerence in how these two systems
relate to the other motivational systems in the brain, particularly the
stress response system. (We’ll really get into this is chapter 4.)
But hey, look: It’s all too easy to metaphorize the population-level
diﬀerences in SIS and SES, the way previous generations metaphorized
our genitals. Like, “Women are easily turned oﬀ and diﬃcult to turn on.”
Or, “Women want sex less than men.” As we’ll see in the chapters that
follow, it’s nothing like that—for most people, arousability depends as
much on context as on brain mechanism.
Your own SIS and SES, and their relationship to your mood or
anxiety, are unique and individual.9 The goal of understanding yourbrake and accelerator is not to understand “what men are like” versus
“what women are like,” but to understand what you are like. Unique,
with great potential for awesomeness.
what turns you on?
Huge, beautiful bathtubs at a B and B
Watching a partner put the kids to bed
“Slash ﬁction” of Harry Potter and Draco Malfoy
A fantasy about having sex in public
Actually having sex in public
No one was born responding sexually to any of these, but they’re all
things that women have told me turn them on. The dual control model
tidily explains how the brain responds to stimuli, to increase or decrease
your arousal. The brain notices sexually relevant stimuli (like fantasies or
an attractive partner) and potential threats (like an unappreciative
audience), and sends signals accordingly; arousal is the process of
turning on the ons and turning oﬀ the oﬀs. But that doesn’t tell us

[PDF page 67]

anything about how your brain ﬁgures out what counts as a sexually
relevant stimulus or a potential threat.
The process of learning what is sexually relevant and what is a threat
works sort of like learning a language. We’re all born with the innate
capacity to learn any human language, but we don’t learn a random
language, right? If you grow up surrounded by people who speak only
English, there is no way you’ll get to kindergarten speaking French. You
learn the language you are surrounded by.
Similarly, you learn the sexual language you’re surrounded by. Just as
there are no innate words, there appear to be almost no innate sexual
stimuli. What turns us on (or oﬀ) is learned from culture, in much the
same way children learn vocabulary and accents from culture.
I’ll illustrate this with three rat studies from the lab of researcher Jim
Pfaus.
Imagine you’re a male lab rat. Your mother raises you with everything
a young rat needs, normal and healthy. In addition to that normal,
healthy development, the researchers train you to associate the smell of
lemons with sexual activity.10 Ordinarily, lemons mean as much to rat
sexuality as they do to human sexuality: nothing. But you’ve been trained
to link lemons and sex in your brain. So when you’re presented with two
receptive female rats, one of whom smells like a healthy, receptive
female rat and the other smells like a healthy, receptive female rat plus
lemons, you’ll prefer the one who smells like lemons—and by “prefer,” I
mean you’ll copulate with both females, but 80 percent of your
ejaculations will be with the lemony partner, and only about 20 percent
of your ejaculations will be with the nonlemony partner. Your ratty SES
learned that lemons are sexually relevant, so the lemony partner hits
your accelerator more.
Let’s look at another experiment. This time, imagine that your brother
was raised in the normal, healthy rat way, without the lemon thing. But
during his ﬁrst opportunity to copulate with a receptive female, the
researchers put him into a rodent harness, a comfortable little jacket.11
If your brother is wearing his little rat jacket the ﬁrst time he copulates
with the receptive female, then the next time he’s with a receptive female
but not wearing the jacket, he’ll actually self-inhibit. His brakes will stay
on because during that single ﬁrst experience, his brain learned that
“jacket + female in estrus = sexytimes.” It did not learn simply “female in
estrus = sexytimes.”

[PDF page 68]

What these two experiments show us is that both the accelerator and
the brakes learn what to respond to based on experience. Neither
lemons nor jackets are innate; both were learned.
But it gets even more basic:
Now imagine once more that you’re a male lab rat, raised healthy and
happy by your mother. Then when you get to late adolescence and are
still “sexually naïve” (aka a virgin), the experimenters introduce you to a
female rat in estrus. This is about as erotic as it gets for a male rat on his
ﬁrst venture! But the researchers don’t give you an opportunity to
copulate with her.12 You never actually get to have sex with this ready
and willing female.
Result: You don’t develop a preference for the smell of a fertile female
over the smell of an infertile female or even of another male. It requires a
sexy (i.e., copulatory) experience to teach the male rat’s brain that a
female in estrus is “sexually relevant.” The instinct to attempt copulation
is there, and he’ll attempt copulation with everybody—but if he doesn’t
have the experience, he can’t learn how to turn that instinct into
successful action.
What is innate is the mechanism by which this learning takes place:
ratty SIS and SES and the ability to learn through experience and
association. But rats need experience to teach their SIS and SES what’s
a threat and what’s sexually relevant.
In a rat’s natural environment, outside the lab, he would never need a
jacket in order to feel sexy, and the smell of lemons wouldn’t make him
ejaculate. The rats learned these things because humans created an
environment where those were salient features of their sexual
environment. But even things you would assume are innate—fertile
female rats—must be learned by experience.
“Years of struggle.”
That’s how Merritt described her sex life. After she graduated,
we became friends, which is when she told me that the most
important thing she had taken away from my class was that there
is a brake, as well as an accelerator. It helped her understand why
she felt desire for sex . . . but it seemed to be trapped. She
realized she had a sensitive brake: Things had to be “just right” for
her to get aroused, and she needed total trust in her partner. And
she worried about sex while she was having it. She called this
“noisy brain.”

[PDF page 69]

“Yep, totally high SIS. The noise is your sexual brakes,
metaphorically squealing,” I said. “It would explain the ‘windmilling
on a cliﬀ’ sensation you described to me a million years ago—your
accelerator and your brakes are activated at the same time.”
With sensitive brakes, Merritt’s sexual motivation system is the
highest risk for problems with desire, arousal, and orgasm—and
she had struggled with all three at some point in her life, she told
me. Lately, it was orgasm.
“I can get so close, and then it’s like there’s all this noise in my
head.”
She has a great relationship, she and her partner have loving
and playful sex on a pretty regular basis, but her arousal
bottlenecks inside her and then orgasm just isn’t there for her, and
then she gets frustrated, and basically sex is turning into more of a
hassle than a pleasure. We’ll hear more about the cause of
Merritt’s challenge in chapter 4, and a great deal about the
solution in chapter 8.
all the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways
It’s true for us, too. Humans go through a learning process similar to
(though much more complex than) rats. And that learning process is
diﬀerent depending on whether you’re a boy or a girl. There are several
theories about how this works, but I’m going to tell you the one I like
best.
Let’s imagine those fraternal twins from chapter 1, the brother and
sister. Born on the same day, having developed in the same hormonal
environment in the womb, they’re as similar as diﬀerent-sex siblings can
be.
The little boy—let’s call him Frankie—soon begins to notice (in his
preverbal infant way) that some signiﬁcant changes happen to part of
his body—his penis grows and changes and feel tingly! His infant brain
begins to link that change in his body to the external stimuli in the
environment and to the internal sensations and emotions that
accompany it. And so from the earliest moment, his brain is linking his
environment with his erections. In boys, then, the process of teaching
their accelerator what constitutes a sexually relevant stimulus is a fairly

[PDF page 70]

straightforward process of categorizing as “sexy” those things that are
associated with erection.13
The little girl—we’ll call her Frannie—doesn’t have that obligingly
obvious physiological response to her environment. As a result, her
brain links “sexually relevant” not to her internal state or genital
response but to the social context. The “sexy” category in a little girl’s
mind is populated not with erection-related stimuli but with social stimuli.
Here’s how that works:
Have you ever seen a toddler learning to walk? When toddlers fall
down, their ﬁrst reaction is to look up at the faces of the adults around
them, as though to say, “Something unexpected just happened! How
should I feel about it?” And when the adults are calm and chirp, “You fell
down. You’re okay!” the toddlers get back up and keep going. But if the
adults panic and run over, exclaiming, “Be careful, you could get hurt!”
the toddlers panic, too, and burst into tears.
In the same way, girls learn what’s sexually relevant not because their
genitals do something so obvious and new that they can’t help learning
from it, but rather by paying attention to their environment, especially to
the other person there with them in the sexually relevant situation.
When I say “learn,” I don’t mean explicit learning, like how you learn
all the state capitals or the Pythagorean theorem. I mean it in the way
those rats learned about lemons and jackets, the way Pavlov’s dogs
learned to salivate when a bell rang, or the way you learned to ride a
bicycle. None of these can be learned from a book but only from
experience.
And this is another way that it’s diﬀerent for girls: Hormones inﬂuence
the functioning of this learning mechanism. Your brain’s readiness to
link external cues to internal arousal processes is diﬀerent at diﬀerent
stages of the menstrual cycle, whereas it’s more stable in men, who
don’t have the monthly oscillation of their hormones.14
As a result of both their diﬀerent genitals and their diﬀerent hormone
cycles, girls’ learning about sexually relevant stimuli is
• likely to begin later in their development
• more inﬂuenced than boys’ by social and emotional context
• more likely to generate a mismatch between their genital response and their experience
of sexual arousal (as I’ll describe in chapter 6)
In other words, girls and boys are diﬀerent. Shocking, I know.

[PDF page 71]

But this is actually a pretty radical thing to say—as I described in the
introduction, most of what our culture teaches us about women’s
sexuality is Men’s Sexuality Lite—basically the same but not quite as
good. The science is telling us that the process of growing from a baby
girl into a woman is—at least in terms of sexual response—just not the
same as the process of growing from a baby boy into a man. Because
the way male and female bodies learn about sex is not the same.
So by the time Frannie and Frankie reach adulthood, both have
developed fundamental frameworks about what things are sexually
relevant and what things are potential threats. These frameworks will
continue to change as they experience new things. And these
frameworks will be diﬀerent from each other, yes they will.
So that’s how we learn what counts as a sexually relevant stimulus.
can you change your SIS or SES?
Let’s go back to that puzzle of erectile dysfunction drugs not helping
women.
If a woman is experiencing sexual diﬃculties, the dual control model
demands that we ask four questions:
• How sensitive is her accelerator?
• What’s activating it?
• How sensitive are her brakes?
• What’s hitting them?
So far in this chapter, you’ve been a sex researcher in the ’60s, a sex
therapist in the ’70s, a pharmaceutical researcher in the late ’90s, and a
male lab rat with a lemon fetish. Now imagine you’re a sex educator,
armed with the dual control model to help people understand how their
sexuality works. People ask you frustrated questions, dissatisﬁed with
their sexual response mechanism—it doesn’t behave the way they want
or expect it to, and they want to change it.
So can we change it?
The answer has two parts, both equally important.
First, SIS and SES are traits you’re born with that remain more or less
stable over your life span, and no one knows precisely which factors
cause them to change. In general, though, changing your SIS and SES
is probably a bit like changing your IQ: You’re born with a range of

[PDF page 72]

potential, and as you develop, your life experience shapes that potential
and lands you somewhere within that range. SIS and SES are way more
ﬂexible than IQ, but we know very little about what factors are involved
in changing them, whether they can be changed deliberately, or if they
respond only to changes in environmental factors beyond our control.
But so far, it seems there’s very little we can do to deliberately change
SIS or SES.
And anyway, for most people SIS and SES are “medium”—neither
overly sensitive nor problematically insensitive. Changing SIS and SES
if you’re medium isn’t even desirable.
But then there’s the second part of the answer: You may not be able
to change the mechanism itself, but you probably can change what the
mechanism responds to. You can often change what your brake
considers a potential threat, and you can certainly reduce those threats,
like unwanted pregnancy, STIs, stress, etc.
You also can change what your accelerator considers sexually
relevant, and you can increase the sexually relevant things in your life. In
other words, you can change the context—your external circumstances
and your internal state. The why and how of these changes is the main
topic of the next three chapters, but here’s the short version:
You know that almost nothing your SIS and SES respond to is innate;
your brain learned to associate particular stimuli with arousal or
inhibition. Through a process of “tuning” your context—both your brain
and your environment—you can maximize your sexual potential.
I thought Laurie, with her low desire, might be high SIS. We wrote
a list of things that activate her brakes: kid, full-time job with a
rotten boss, her parents—not to mention the ways her body had
changed since her pregnancy, which made her unhappy, and she
also felt unhappy about feeling unhappy, since the feminist in her
made her judge herself for not being able to let go of the arbitrary
cultural ideal and just Love Her Body. Oh, and also? She was
going back to school for a master’s degree. So no big deal.
She didn’t have a particularly sensitive brake—she had an
avalanche of stuﬀ constantly putting pressure on a very average
brake.
“Just seeing all this written down makes me need a massage,”
she groaned.
“So ask Johnny to give you a massage,” I suggested.

[PDF page 73]

“Sure, and then I feel guilty if we don’t have sex after that.”
“Oooh, good insight! Add that to the list of things that hit your
brakes: feeling like you’re expected to have sex.”
She did. And that’s when I saw the lights go on for her. She
said, “So all the toys and games were hitting the accelerator, but
at the same time all these things in my life were hitting the sexual
brake in my brain . . . and it doesn’t matter how hard you hit the
accelerator if the brake is on the ﬂoor. Huh.”
“Right.”
“So how do I stop hitting brake?”
The million-dollar question.
The short answer is: Reduce your stress, be aﬀectionate toward
your body, and let go of the false ideas about how sex is
“supposed” to work, to create space in your life for how sex
actually works.
The full answer is . . . what the rest of this book is about.
My suggestion to Laurie was to stop trying to make herself want
sex for a while. Take away the performance pressure.
She did not follow my advice—not right away, anyway. What
she tried instead was a clever shift in context, which is what the
next chapter is about.
To put it in terms of the garden metaphor I used in chapter 1, your SIS
and SES are characteristics of the soil in your garden. So are your
genitals and the rest of your body and brain. The innate sensitivity of
your SIS and SES inﬂuences how your garden grows—which species of
plants will thrive, how densely you can plant them—but other factors can
have at least as much inﬂuence. Water, sun, choice of plants, even the
addition of fertilizer—in other words, everything from stress to love to
trust to a vibrator—can all inﬂuence the abundance of your garden. You
can’t change the soil itself, but you can augment it and you can make
smart decisions about how to manage it.
And that’s what chapter 3 is about.
tl;dr
• Your brain has a sexual “accelerator” that responds to “sexually relevant” stimulation—
anything you see, hear, smell, touch, taste, or imagine that your brain has learned to

[PDF page 74]

associate with sexual arousal.
• Your brain also has sexual “brakes” that respond to “potential threats”—anything you
see, hear, smell, touch, taste, or imagine that your brain interprets as a good reason not to
be turned on right now. These can be anything from STDs and unwanted pregnancy to
relationship issues or social reputation.
• There’s virtually no “innate” sexually relevant stimulus or threat; our accelerators and
brakes learn when to respond through experience. And that learning process is diﬀerent
for males and females.
• People vary in how sensitive their brakes and accelerator are. Take the little quiz on this
page to ﬁnd out how sensitive yours are—and remember that most people score in the
medium range, and all scores are normal.

[PDF page 75]

three
context
AND THE “ONE RING” (TO RULE THEM ALL) IN YOUR EMOTIONAL BRAIN
You’d like Henry if you met him—he’s polite, with a sweet smile
and a soft voice, handsome, a little old-fashioned. He stands up
when a lady enters the room. Henry is almost as geeky as
Camilla, his wife. Their ideal Friday night involves Settlers of
Catan, anything by Joss Whedon, or Cards Against Humanity—or
possibly all three.
And they have a nice sex life, he and Camilla. Henry is pretty
much always the initiator, and though he’d certainly enjoy being
the object of his wife’s sexual pursuit, he’s an easygoing guy who
feels lucky to have a life partner who shares both his sense of
humor and his need to have the bathroom kept organized at all
times. They’re careful, thoughtful, introverted sweethearts.
When they ﬁrst met—I mean, when they ﬁrst met in person,
which doesn’t include the weeks of online ﬂirting—their eyes met
and both of them experienced an instantaneous, “Yes. This is it.
You’re it.”
But they’re careful, thoughtful people, and they took it slow.
They told each other, “I’m not really ready for a relationship. We
should just be friends.”
And they nodded solemnly at each other.
And they became friends.
For a year.
Gradually, Henry began to court her. He brought ﬂowers . . .
made of Legos. He commissioned her favorite webcomic artist to
draw a portrait of her. He wrote RPG scenarios for her. He wore
ties. He held her hand.

[PDF page 76]

By the time they kissed, they were both in love—though neither
had said so. And by the time they ﬁrst made love, they had
committed their lives to each other, and they told each other so
over and over, urgent whispers in the dark.
Camilla, you’ll remember, is a low SES woman—she represents
about 4–8 percent of women whose sensitivity to sexually relevant
stimuli is fairly low.1 And yet on the day she got married, oh, she
was sensitive.
Five years later . . . not so much.
She told me, “It used to be, I’d be in the kitchen and he’d come
up behind me and start kissing my neck and I’d just melt instantly.
But now he’ll do the same thing and I’ll just be like, ‘I’m trying
make dinner.’ I don’t understand what’s wrong with me now.”
“Nothing’s wrong, the context is just diﬀerent,” I said.
“How is it diﬀerent? I still love him exactly as much as I did the
day we got married; I just seem to have emptied my ‘lust tank.’ Do
people have a ‘lust tank’ that can be empty?”
“No . . . well . . . sort of? Not really. It’s not so much a tank
as . . . a . . . a shower,” I said. “A shower where sometimes there’s
tons of hot water, and the water pressure and the showerhead are
great, and other times there’s hardly any water pressure or the
showerhead is all gummed up with schmutz. You can always take
a shower, but all these contextual factors inﬂuence whether that
shower is fantastic or frustrating.”
“Contextual factors. So what is that in real life? Candles and
ﬂowers?” She was grimacing. “Bodice ripping?”
“Those are circumstances. Situations. That’s part of it, but when
I say ‘context,’ I also mean, like, brain states.”
“Oh!” she said, brightening. “That sounds much more interesting
than candles.”
It is. And it’s what this chapter is about: how to get the water
nice and hot and build up the water pressure.
In their survey research on “cues for sexual desire factors,” Katie McCall
and Cindy Meston asked women what turned them on, and found that
the results divided into four general categories.2
Love/Emotional Bonding Cues, such as feeling a sense of love,
security, commitment, emotional closeness, protection, and support in
your relationship, and feeling a kind of “special attention” from your

[PDF page 77]

partner. Example: A woman told me the extraordinarily romantic story of
a boyfriend who ﬂew halfway around the globe to surprise her for their
second anniversary of dating. Talk about closeness, commitment, and
special attention. Yeah, that man got laid.
Explicit/Erotic Cues, such as watching a sexy movie, reading an erotic
story, watching or hearing other people having sex, anticipating having
sex, knowing your partner desires you, or noticing your own or your
partner’s arousal. Example: A woman in her twenties told me of a time
when she woke up in the middle of the night in her boyfriend’s
apartment, to the sound of the upstairs neighbors having sex. The
rhythmic squeaking and grunting sighs instantly turned her on. She
kissed her boyfriend awake and they listened together, then had fast,
intense sex.
Visual/Proximity Cues, such as seeing an attractive, well-dressed
potential partner, with a well-toned body and lots of conﬁdence,
intelligence, and class. Example: A friend once said to me rhetorically,
“What is it about the white cuﬀs of a shirt peeking out under a suit
jacket?” I suggested, “Maybe a marker of a social status?” And she
added, “That, and grooming. A man with pristine white cuﬀs is a man
whose skin will taste good.”
Romantic/Implicit Cues include intimate behaviors such as dancing
closely, sharing a hot tub or massages or other intimate touch (like
touching the face or hair), watching a sunset, laughing or whispering
together, or smelling pleasant. Example: A woman in her thirties told me
that she and her husband were saving up to remodel their bathroom,
after they realized that a reason she was so keen for sex when they
went on vacation was that they took long, hot (in every sense) baths
together in the giant tubs at the B and Bs where they stayed. More
baths, more sex.
•  •  •
None of this is too surprising, but it’s always great to have data to back
up our intuitions: A blend of erotic and romantic cues increases desire in
women. McCall and Meston’s work tells us what activates the
accelerator of women’s sexual response.
In a series of nine focus groups with eighty women, Cynthia Graham,
Stephanie Sanders, Robin Milhausen, and Kimberly McBride cataloged
women’s thoughts on things that cause them to turn on or to “keep the
brakes on.”3 These researchers found themes that have interesting

[PDF page 78]

parallels with McCall and Meston’s work. Here are the themes, with a
quote from the research participants to illustrate each:
• Feelings About One’s Body. “It’s much easier for me to feel aroused when I’m feeling
really comfortable with myself . . . it’s not as easy to feel aroused when I’m not feeling
good about myself and my body.”
• Concerns About Reputation. “Being single and you know, wanting to be sexual with
another person and thinking ‘okay, am I going to be too much?’ or ‘am I going to be not
enough?’ or ‘what are they going to think of me because I’m doing these things?’ . . .”
• Putting on the Brakes. “I think it’s like you might have some inclinations and then you’re
like, ‘wait a minute, you can’t do that,’ you’re in a relationship or that guy’s a loser . . . and
all of a sudden you just [think] ‘okay, ﬁne, forget it, I can’t. That’s a bad idea,’ and just
walk away from it.”
• Unwanted Pregnancy/Contraception. “Unwanted pregnancy is a big turn oﬀ and if you’re
with a partner who seems unconcerned about that, then it really feels like a danger.”
• Feeling Desired Versus Feeling Used by Partner. “I like it when [men] caress not only,
like, your body parts that get sexually aroused but just, like, your arms . . . it feels like he’s
encompassing you and appreciating your whole body.”
• Feeling “Accepted” by Partner. “Even with my second husband, and we were together
16 years, he was not accepting of my sexual responses . . . I make a lot of noise or [with]
my favorite way to orgasm, he felt left out . . . That was just the beginning of just really
shutting down.”
• Style of Approach/Initiation and Timing. “His ‘game’ . . . you know, how the man
approached you, how did he get me to talk to him longer than like, ﬁve minutes? . . . [It’s]
the ways he went about it.”
• Negative Mood. “If you’re very upset with your intended sexual partner, if you’re very
upset with him about something, there’s no way that you are going to be aroused.”
These two studies help us begin to understand that women’s sexual
interest depends on a wide range of factors. When we ask them, “What
gets you in the mood?” women tell us:
• Having an attractive partner who respects them and accepts them as they are
• Feeling trusting and aﬀectionate in their relationship
• Being conﬁdent and healthy—both emotionally and physically
• Feeling desired by their partner, being approached in a way that makes them feel
special
• Explicit erotic cues, like erotica or porn, or hearing or seeing other people having sex

[PDF page 79]

But what these answers tell us, too, is that it depends. A woman who
feels conﬁdent in herself, and who is in a great relationship with a
partner she loves, trusts, and feels attracted to, still may not want sex if
she has the ﬂu, worked seventy hours that week, or prefers that both
she and her partner be freshly showered before sex and they’ve just
come in from doing yard work together.
Another thing these answers tell us is that what women say on
surveys and in focus groups can’t tell us everything that happens in real
life. In The Science of Trust, relationship researcher John Gottman
recounts the stories of women in abusive relationships, in which they
habitually were targets of physical violence.4 These women astonished
him and his research partner by telling them that some of the best sex
they had followed immediately after the acts of violence. And in What Do
Women Want? Daniel Bergner describes Isabel, who couldn’t get
herself into a hot and bothered state about her respectful, cherishing
boyfriend, yet she had felt magnetically drawn to the objectifying jerk
who wanted her to dress trashy and, she knew, would never commit to a
relationship with her.5 I’ve heard similar stories from many women, andnothing in this research explains it. Nothing tells us why makeup and
breakup sex have earned a reputation for intensity.
So what gives?
What gives is the dual control mechanism’s relationship with your
many other motivational systems. What gives is context.
Context is made of two things: the circumstances of the present
moment—whom you’re with, where you are, whether the situation is
novel or familiar, risky or safe, etc.—and your brain state in the present
moment—whether you’re relaxed or stressed, trusting or not, loving or
not, right now, in this moment. The evidence is mounting that women’s
sexual response is more sensitive than men’s to context, including mood
and relationship factors, and women vary more from each other in how
much such factors inﬂuence their sexual response.6
So this chapter is about context: how your external circumstances and
your internal brain state can inﬂuence your sexual responsiveness.
We’ll start with the idea that your experience or perception of all kinds
of sensations varies, depending on a number of factors, including
external circumstances, mood, trust, and life history. Then we’ll get deep
into the nitty-gritty of why this is true and unchangeable: When your
brain is in a stressed state, almost everything is perceived as a potential
threat. And then I’ll show you the speciﬁc brain mechanism that governs

[PDF page 80]

this whole process. Understanding this mechanism—I call it your
emotional “One Ring”—is central to ﬁguring out how context aﬀects your
sexual responsiveness.
I want to warn you ahead of time: This is the nerdiest, scienciest
chapter in the book. Dust oﬀ your thinking cap. It’s worth it. The payoﬀ is
that anytime you hear someone complain, “Women are so complicated
—yesterday she liked one thing, today she wants something completely
diﬀerent,” or wonder, “Why don’t I respond the way I used to?” you’ll be
able to say, “Context! What a woman wants and likes changes based
on her external circumstances and her internal state.” This chapter tells
you how to crack the code and make sense of it all.
Laurie’s dissatisfaction with her sex life wasn’t a result of a
challenging SIS or SES; it was a result of a challenging context.
But she didn’t like my suggestion that she just let herself not want
sex for a while. To her, that felt like giving up. She wanted to want
sex, and, darn it all, she was going try.
So she thought about times in the past when she had
pleasurable sex and remembered a particularly excellent pre-baby
anniversary vacation at a fancy hotel in the mountains.
“Aha! Context!” she thought, and she and Johnny made a
reservation and planned a trip to recapture the passion.
The plan failed utterly. The drive was long and exhausting, they
argued on the way there, and by the time they ﬁnished dinner, the
pressure of expectation was totally overwhelming. Laurie felt
herself shut down, and she just said no, no to everything. She took
a hot bath, had a glass of wine, and went to sleep. Johnny
watched a movie.
And then in the morning, she felt too guilty about the previous
night to try again.
So one afternoon soon after that, Laurie and Johnny sat down
and tried to ﬁgure out what had worked on that ﬁrst trip that was
missing the second time.
Well, their whole lives were diﬀerent now: They were parents,
she had a frustrating job, she was a student  .  .  . They had
replicated the external circumstances but not the context.
“Great, so all you have to do is quit your job, quit school, and
sell Trevor to the circus. Problem solved,” Johnny teased. More
constructively, he said, “Maybe we’re thinking about it the wrong

[PDF page 81]

way. Maybe it’s about what it feels like, rather than where we are
or what we’re doing. When you think about the great sex we had
on that anniversary, what did it feel like?”
She thought about it for a minute.
And then she burst into tears.
She began talking about how much she loved him, how she
relied on him for her sanity in a life that seemed speciﬁcally
designed to make her crazy, how she wanted to show him, not just
tell him, how important he is to her, but every time she considered
initiating sex, she just felt swamped and overwhelmed and her
body shut down on her. Undiﬀerentiated grief ﬂowed from her as
she talked—grief for her lost sexuality, but also for her lost peace
of mind, her lost sense of self, independent of her roles as mother,
daughter, wife, boss, employee, student . . .
And then, when the tide of her grief ebbed, they had great sex.
After that, Laurie came to me and said, “What the hell?! We go
on a romantic getaway, nothing—worse than nothing! But I ugly
cry about how much I love him and how exhausting my life is, and
we have hot and dirty sex. This context thing makes no sense!”
So I explained.
sensation in context
Suppose you’re ﬂirting with a certain special someone, and they start
tickling you. You can imagine some situations where that’s fun, right?
Flirtatious. Potentially leading to some nookie.
Now imagine that you are feeling annoyed with that same special
someone and they try to tickle you.
It feels irritating, right? Like maybe you’d want to punch that person in
the face.
It’s the same sensation, but because the context is diﬀerent, your
perception of that sensation is diﬀerent.
It’s true for all our sensory domains. A smell that seems pleasant
when it’s labeled “cheese” smells gross when it is labeled “body odor.”7
Same smell + diﬀerent context = diﬀerent perception. Mood changes
your perception of taste, too: feeling sad, as you do at the end of a
weepy movie, reduces your ability to taste fat in food.8

[PDF page 82]

It’s true in all your other senses, too, not just the basic ﬁve you learned
in elementary school. We’ve all experienced it with thermoreception:
Imagine your car has run out of gas one mile from the gas station, on a
scorching-hot, sauna-humid day. You walk the mile through the sludgy
air. You get to the air-conditioned gas station, chilled to seventy-two
degrees, and it feels like a frigid blast, a powerful relief from the heat.
Now imagine your car runs out of gas in the same place six months
later, and it’s a bitterly cold, bitingly windy day, and you trudge the same
mile to the gas station. That same seventy-two degrees now feels like a
warmed oven, a powerful relief from the painful cold. Context.
It’s also true for equilibrioception (sense of balance): Anyone who’s
gotten oﬀ a ship after a week-long cruise knows that our brains adapt to
movement—you spend two days wondering why the ground is moving
under your feet. Nociception (sense of pain): People who’ve
experienced serious pain develop a higher tolerance for future pain.9
And chronoception (sense of time): Time does indeed seem to ﬂy when
you’re having fun—or rather, when you’re in a state of “ﬂow.”10
These changes in perception are not “just in your head.” People who
are given a drug that will relax them and are told, “This is a drug that will
relax you,” not only feel more relaxed compared to those who got the
drug but not the information, they also have more of the drug in their
blood plasma.11 Context changes more than how you feel; it can change
your blood chemistry.
It’s also true for sexual stimuli. In chapter 2, I described how the dual
control mechanism responds to stimuli that are either sexually relevant
or a threat, and I talked about how we learn what stimuli goes into which
category—remember the rat with a lemon fetish? But just as the smell of
cheese or the taste of fat is inﬂuenced by our mental state and the
external circumstances, whether a particular stimulus is experienced as
sexually appealing depends on the context in which we perceive it.
Tickling is one example of this. Suppose you’re watching your partner
do laundry. If you feel overall supported and connected in your
relationship, then seeing your partner doing the laundry may act as a
cue for erotic thoughts. But if you’ve been feeling resentful because
you’ve been doing a disproportionate amount of the laundry lately, then
seeing your partner do laundry may feel satisfying—“It’s about time!”—
without feeling sexy.
The same goes for whether something hits the brakes. For example,
the extent to which a person’s sexual brakes are engaged because of

[PDF page 83]

fear of an STI changes depending on the perceived likelihood of
infection and the perceived impact of that STI. Using a condom? Know
your partner’s health history and sexual history? Trust that you’re both
being monogamous? Less threat. No condom? No history? Potential for
betrayal? More threat. It’s the same with social consequences, too:
Potential damage to your social status, your reputation, or your
relationship all act as threats, depending on how likely they seem and
how negative they would be if they happened.
Learning to recognize the contexts that increase your brain’s
perception of the world as a sexy place, and having skills to maximize
the sexy contexts, is key to increasing your sexual satisfaction. At the
end of this chapter, you’ll ﬁnd worksheets to help you think through what
aspects of context inﬂuence your perception of sensations. On those
worksheets, you recall three amazing sexual experiences you’ve had
and three not-so-great sexual experiences, and think concretely and
speciﬁcally about what made those experiences what they were, in
terms of both external circumstances and your internal state. Do take
the time to do this. Thinking through even just one amazing experience
and one not-so-great experience can give you a sense of which contexts
increase your brain’s tendency to interpret the world as sexy and which
reduce that tendency.
Painful or Erotic?
If your partner spanks your butt while you’re in the middle of tying your toddler’s shoes, it’s
annoying. But if your partner spanks your butt in the middle of sex, it can feel very, very
sexy indeed. Context can cause sensations that are typically perceived as painful, like
spanking or whipping, to be erotic. Sexual “submission” requires relaxing into trust—
turning oﬀ the oﬀs—and allowing your partner to take control. In this explicitly erotic, highly
trusting, and consensual context, your brain is open and receptive, ready to interpret any
and all sensations as erotic. And in a culture where women have to spend so much time
with the brakes on, saying no, it’s no wonder we have fantasies about abandoning all
control, relaxing into absolute trust (turning oﬀ the brakes) and allowing ourselves to
experience sensation.
sex, rats, and rock ’n’ roll
What is the ultimate nerd evidence of the power of context to inﬂuence
your brain’s perception of a sensation? Look at what happens to rat

[PDF page 84]

brains when you play them Iggy Pop:
Imagine you’re a lab rat, and you’re in a three-chambered box.12 The
researchers have painlessly implanted a tiny probe in your brain so that
they can zap your nucleus accumbens (NAc), which is a tiny region
deep within your brain; its job is to tell you which direction to go—toward
or away from something in the environment. In the ﬁrst chamber, you’re
surrounded by the ordinary setup that you always encounter in the lab—
the lights are on, but it’s fairly quiet. Here, if the researcher zaps the top
region of the NAc, you engage in approach behaviors, like sniﬃng and
exploration. Psychologist John Gottman calls these “What’s this? ”
behaviors.13 Curious. Exploring. Moving toward. And when theresearchers stimulate the bottom region of your NAc, you exhibit
avoidance—“What the hell is this? ” behaviors, like stamping your paws
and turning away your head. Fearful. Avoidant. Moving away. And all of
that is normal and exactly what you would expect, as a sort of bionic,
semiremote-controlled rat.
So now you go into the next chamber, where the lights are oﬀ, it’s
quiet and calm, and it smells like home. You love it here, it’s like a spa
for rats. In this context, when the researcher zaps your top NAc, the
same thing happens—approach behaviors. But this is where it gets
crazy: When the researcher zaps your bottom NAc  . . . approach
behaviors! In a safe, relaxing environment, almost the entire NAc
activates approach motivation!
As soon as you move into the third chamber, ultrabright lights turn on
and suddenly Iggy Pop is blaring—imagine “Lust for Life” playing at
randomly varying volumes, so you can’t even get used to it. Everything
about this environment stresses you out. You’re like an introverted
bookworm at a bad nightclub. Now when the researchers zap your top
NAc, it doesn’t activate curiosity or approach behaviors, as it has in the
previous environments; no, in the new, stressful environment, zapping
almost anywhere on the NAc generates avoidant, “What the hell is
this? ” behavior.
When I say that perception of sensation is context dependent, this is
the deepest sense in which I mean it. I mean that phylogenetically old
parts of your brain (your “monkey brain”) can respond in opposite ways,
approach or avoidance, depending on the circumstances in which they
are functioning.14 In a safe, comfortable environment, it hardly matters
where you stimulate; you’ll activate approach, curiosity, desire. And in a

[PDF page 85]

stressful, dangerous environment, it hardly matters where you stimulate;
you’ll activate avoidance, anxiety, dread.
“Context changes how your brain responds to sex,” doesn’t just
mean, “Set the mood,” like with candles, corsets, and a locked bedroom
door. It also means that when you’re in a great sex-positive context,
almost everything can activate your curious “What’s this?” desirous
approach to sex. And when you’re in a not-so-great context—either
external circumstances or internal brain state—it doesn’t matter how
sexy your partner is, how much you love them, or how fancy your
underwear is, almost nothing will activate that curious, appreciative,
desirous experience.
In chapter 4 I’ll describe the evolutionary reasons for this, but for now
just know: It’s completely normal that context changes how you perceive
sensations. It’s just how brains work.
Here’s a puzzle:
Merritt, with her sensitive brake, struggled mightily with sex in
real life. Yet she had an active sexual imagination and had been
both reader and author of erotic ﬁction for a decade. Her favorite
stories to read and to write were gay male BDSM—she jokingly
calls it, “Fifty Shades of Gay.” There just seemed to be something
about the idea of two men tangled in an intense power dynamic
that really captured her erotic imagination.
“Getting turned on by stories about two men having kinky sex,
but being so easily shut down during sex with the woman I love?
How does that make sense? A noise. A ﬁngernail when I’m not
expecting it. A stray thought, even. And yet I spend hours every
day writing about men having sex in public or on a rack or tied to
trees.”
Learning about her sexual brake helped some, but it was when
she and Carol talked about context—What contexts arouse you?
What contexts hit the brakes?—that they discovered that fantasies
were great for Merritt, while real life was . . . a challenge.
Which makes lots of sense for a woman with a sensitive brake.
The context—external circumstances and internal brain state—of a
fantasy is very diﬀerent from the context of real life. When you’re
alone in bed fantasizing about being dominated by ﬁve big,
unknown men, you are actually safe, there is no threat to activate

[PDF page 86]

your stress response, and the novelty of the fantasy adds fuel to
the ﬁre. Great context!
But if in real life you were surrounded by ﬁve big, unknown men,
your brain would probably react with a stress response—Run!
Fight! or Freeze!—and that stress response would most likely hit
your sexual brakes. Not a great context.
“So what do we do about that?” Merritt asked me.
“Trust,” I said. “Letting go of the brake is about trust.”
Merritt shook her head and looked at Carol. “I trust you one
hundred ﬁfty percent. I’d jump oﬀ a cliﬀ blindfolded if you said
there was a crash pad at the bottom, no hesitation.”
And then Carol said, “That only leaves one other person for you
not to trust, huh?”
Merritt blinked at us both and said, “Me. I don’t trust me. Is that
what you’re saying?”
I said, “Do you?”
“I trust myself to pay bills on time. I trust myself as a parent. As
a writer. Yeah, I . . . huh.” She stopped and squinted her eyes
thoughtfully at me.
“You trust your intellect,” Carol said, “and your heart. But do you
trust your body?”
Merritt rubbed a hand hard against her forehead and said,
“Honestly, no—and for good reason.”
And then we talked about the good reason.
I’d like to spend some time with the mesolimbic cortex. It gets pretty
nerdy right here—in terms of the garden metaphor, these next two
sections are like describing how the soil transforms a seed into a
seedling. It’s not something the gardener has much control over, and it
happens well below the surface, beyond our ability to observe directly.
But especially if you have found cultivating your (or your partner’s)
sexuality kind of challenging, the next few pages could really enrich your
entire understanding of what’s happening in the deep, subconscious
parts of your sexual response.
Ready? Okay.
your emotional one ring

[PDF page 87]

You’ve probably read about exciting research ﬁndings related to “the
pleasure centers of the brain.” Put food in your mouth, and these
systems get to work. Drink water, they respond. Listen to music, look at
art, shoot heroin, or read a novel, and your mesolimbic cortex is busily
evaluating, learning, and motivating. Watch porn, hear your neighbors
having sex, or feel your partner’s hand gripping lightly in your hair, and
these brain systems answer—assessing, planning, and encouraging
you to move closer . . . or farther away.
For those of you who keep a map of the midbrain on your wall and
would like to follow along at home, the organs involved in these systems
are the ventral pallidum, the nucleus accumbens body and shell (this is
the part from the Iggy Pop study), the amygdala, and the brain stem
parabrachial nucleus, among others. (There’s a great tidbit for cocktail
parties—nothing like the phrase “brain stem parabrachial nucleus” to
impress sexy singles over a dirty martini.)
The thing is, these are not really the “pleasure centers”—or not just
pleasure centers.
What we often describe as the pleasure centers or reward centers of
the brain are in fact crucially more subtle and interesting than that. To
call it “reward” or “pleasure” is like saying “vagina” when you mean
“vulva”: Pleasure is part of it, certainly, but only part, and to deny the
other parts their names is to deny their signiﬁcance and misunderstand
the nature of the multifaceted beast.
There are actually three intertwined but separable functions in these
deep, old parts of the brain, which I simplify here as enjoying, expecting,
and eagerness. These three mechanisms form the universal mammalian
hardware of pleasure, learning, and motivation—or, as Kent Berridge
and Morten Kringelbach geekily put it, “One hedonic brain system to
mediate them all.”15
This is a reference to the One Ring from Lord of the Rings mythology;
in the original context, the One Ring has the power to control all the
other Rings of Power. In the context of your emotional brain, the One
Ring processes all of your emotional/motivational systems, including
stress responses (fear, aggression, and shutdown), disgust, all forms of
pleasure from physical to artistic, love and social connection, and of
course sex.16 All these emotions function, all at once, all in the sameplace: in your emotional One Ring.
So don’t be too impressed when you read a pop science article that
says, “The same parts of your brain light up when you have sex as when

[PDF page 88]

you take cocaine.” Of course they do. That’s the One Ring. It mediates
them all.
When I say “One Ring” for the rest of the book, I mean this cluster of
enjoying, expecting, and eagerness, where all your emotional responses
—sex, stress, love, disgust, etc.—compete and interact and inﬂuence
each other.
Here’s how the three systems work.
The enjoying system is perhaps the closest to what we generally think
of as “reward.” The enjoying mechanism is the “Yes!” or “No!” in your
brain—it assesses the “hedonic impact” of a stimulus: Does it feel
good? How good? Does it feel bad? How bad? When you put a drop of
sugar water on the tongue of a newborn, the infant’s enjoying system
sets oﬀ ﬁreworks; sugar is innately rewarding—we’re born ready to
enjoy sweet tastes. Salt is not. Genital sensations are, likewise, innately
rewarding—fetuses have been known to masturbate in utero.17 Elbow
sensations, not so much. This one system manages all forms of
enjoying, including sweet tastes, sexual sensations, the perception of
beauty, the joy of love, and the thrill of winning.
Expecting is the process of linking what’s happening now with what
should come next. Pavlov’s dogs salivated when a bell rang because
their expecting system connected the bell with food. The rats in chapter
2 linked lemons or jackets with sex, and baby Frankie and baby
Frannie’s brains coupled genital response, internal sensations, and
external environment because of the expecting system. This is implicit
learning—a diﬀerent experience from explicit learning. Explicit learning
is memorizing a poem with spaced repetition and conscious eﬀort.
Implicit learning is (in part) the expecting system linking stimuli across
time and space. We don’t have to study or memorize anything to learn
which foods taste delicious and which people are mean. We learn these
kinds of emotional things implicitly.
Eagerness, the third system, is the generic gas pedal of the emotional
brain. Eagerness fuels the desire to move toward something or away
from it. When eagerness is activated with the stress response
mechanism, we search for safety. When eagerness is activated with the
attachment mechanism (see the next chapter), we seek aﬀection. And of
course when eagerness is activated with our sexual accelerator, we
pursue sexual stimulation.
When eagerness is activated, we experience what Kent Berridge calls
“a moment of special temptation.”18 The experience of urgent craving or

[PDF page 89]

yearning is powered by the eagerness system.
And it’s context dependent. Remember the rat in the spa environment
versus the nightclub environment. The “What’s this? ” and “What the
hell is this? ” behaviors triggered by stimulation of the NAc were
eagerness behaviors—eagerness to get closer . . . or farther away.
Which set of behaviors was elicited depended on how calm or stressed
the rat was.
How do these systems work in human sexuality? If something
activates your sexual accelerator—say, your partner kissing you—
expecting has done its job. Like the rats with a lemon fetish, your
accelerator has learned that kissing is sexually relevant. Expecting is
neutral, neither nice nor nasty, just . . . relevant. But when the cue that
activates expecting is not only sexually relevant but also nice (which
often depends on context), it activates enjoying, too. And when it’s nice
enough, it gives rise to eagerness.
The sequence works this way: Something sexually relevant happens,
and your brain goes, “Hey, that’s sexually relevant.” That’s expecting.
And if the context is right, your brain also goes, “Hey, that’s nice!”
That’s enjoying. And if the stimulus is nice enough, your brain goes,
“Ooh, go get more of that!” That’s eagerness.
•  •  •
Did you make it? Phew! That was the hard part. Nice job. I’ll be referring
to the One Ring of enjoying, expecting, and eagerness throughout the
rest of the book—like in chapter 6 we’ll learn that genital response is
expecting while the psychological experience of sexual arousal is
expecting plus enjoying. And in chapter 8 we’ll learn how focusing the
One Ring on sexual pleasure, and releasing it from all other motivations,
is the path to ecstatic orgasms.
The research measuring how the three systems function in human
sexuality has barely begun. I include them here not because I’ve already
seen deﬁnitive proof of how they aﬀect sexual wellbeing but because
when I teach about them, I see how helpful people ﬁnd it to know that
“desirable,” “pleasurable,” and “sexually relevant” are not always the
same thing. Your brain can enjoy something without eagerness for
more. It can expect that a kind of stimulation will lead to sex, and
expecting may activate desire—movement toward—but it may also
activate dread—movement away—depending on the context. Your brain
can even be eager for something without particularly enjoying it, as we’ll
see with Olivia.

[PDF page 90]

And all three are context dependent: If your expecting, eagerness,
and enjoying substrates are busy coping with stress or attachment
issues (which are the topic of the next chapter), then sexually relevant
stimuli may not be perceived as sexy at all.
Let’s walk through the three systems in diﬀerent contexts to see how
they can change sexual responsiveness:
Context 1: Before you get pregnant. Your partner lies down in bed
next to you and you enjoy your usual end-of-the-day cuddle while you
talk through plans for tomorrow. Your partner’s hands begin to wander
over your body, which activates expecting and enjoying, since you’re in
a relaxed, aﬀectionate state of mind, and pretty soon eagerness joins
the party. So you start kissing and letting your hands wander, too, and
one thing leads to another.
Context 2: Two months after you give birth. Your partner lies down in
bed next to you, waking you up from a rare and precious sound sleep,
wanting to cuddle and talk through plans for tomorrow. You turn into
your partner’s arms and talk for a while, and their hands begin to
wander over your body—your sleep-deprived, lactating, diﬀerent-
shaped body with its still-healing vagina and feet half a size bigger than
they were a year ago, a body that has been constantly pawed by little
baby hands. Your partner’s touch on this strange new body of yours
activates expecting . . . which ﬁlls you with dread—eagerness to avoid
sex. So you turn back over and say, “Honey, not tonight.”
And your partner thinks—and maybe you do, too—“I don’t
understand. This used to be great.”
Same stimulation, diﬀerent context. Diﬀerent response by your
emotional One Ring, leading to diﬀerent outcomes.
We could replace “give birth” in that example with “put your parent
into hospice care,” “learn your partner was cheating on you,” or “get laid
oﬀ from your job,” and get a somewhat similar outcome. On the other
hand, we could replace it with “decide to try to get pregnant,” “renew
your vows,” or “win the lottery,” and get a pretty diﬀerent outcome.
As we saw with the rats who had Iggy Pop blasted at them, when your
stress levels are high, practically anything will cause your eagerness to
activate in an avoidant, “What the hell is this?” mode. But if you’re in a
sex-positive context, almost anything can activate eagerness in curious,
“What’s this?” mode.
Exactly what context a woman experiences as sex positive varies both
from woman to woman and also across a woman’s life span, but

[PDF page 91]

generally it’s a context that’s
• low stress
• high aﬀection
• explicitly erotic
Remember the studies of what women say turns them on, from the
start of the chapter. That stuﬀ, and more. Because of the One Ring,
which mediates all of your diﬀerent emotions at once, binding them
together.
Olivia and Patrick are fabulous together—hilarious, charming, the
kind of couple whose love is contagious; when you see them
together, you fall a little in love yourself. They hug and laugh
aﬀectionately even while they’re ﬁghting. Though only in their
twenties, you can tell these two will still be making out like
teenagers when they’re 103.
Their main conﬂict was about sex: Patrick, like about 80–90
percent of people, ﬁnds that stress hits his brakes, shutting down
all interest in sex—he’s a “ﬂatliner” (more on that in chapter 4). But
for Olivia, with her sensitive accelerator, stress is like fuel—she’s a
“redliner.” And since they’re both graduate students, they get
stressed at the same time during the semester (ﬁnal exams),
which means that right when Olivia’s most interested in sex,
Patrick is least interested.
Same context—opposite experiences.
And when you put it in the context of a relationship, it gets
worse, because the two styles escalate each other—when Patrick
feels stressed about the fact that Olivia wants sex and he doesn’t,
that increases his stress, which hits his brake even harder. And
when Olivia feels stressed about the fact that she wants sex and
Patrick doesn’t, that increases her stress, which activates her
accelerator even more. I call this “the chasing dynamic” (more
about it in chapter 7), but Olivia had her own term for it:
“Shit show.”
Patrick added, “And it comes at a time in the semester when
we’re both already stretched too thin and can barely feed
ourselves, much less talk about our feelings. How can we ﬁx it?”
I shrugged. “Easy. Work out a plan when you’re both calm, and
then use the plan when you’re stressed.”

[PDF page 92]

Olivia said, “Oh.”
There it was again—the disappointment that waved a giant red
ﬂag over a big emotional . . . something. Last time I missed it. This
time I caught it.
“You were hoping for a diﬀerent answer?” I asked.
“I was sort of hoping we could ﬁx me.”
“Fix you? Are you broken?”
“I guess not,” she said, “but I just . . . it doesn’t feel good, the
out-of-controlness. I was hoping I could rein that part in, both for
my own sake and so that I don’t drive Patrick completely insane.”
Which is not unusual. The context of stress plus sex doesn’t
bring with it an increase in pleasure. On the contrary, when she’s
stressed, anxious, or overwhelmed, Olivia said, “I feel this drive to
orgasm, but it’s a drive that disconnects me from my body and
from Patrick. I hate it. It’s like I’m a visitor in my body. Out of
control.”
It’s a perfect example of eagerness without enjoying.
“Ah, so it’s a challenge in your relationship and also it’s
uncomfortable for you individually,” I said. “It’s pretty simple to
change—simple, though not always easy.”
They both said, “How?”
you can’t make them
I use italics when I describe expecting, eagerness, and enjoying in order
to be clear that I don’t mean wanting, seeking, or expecting in the usual
sense of, “Hey, what do you want for dinner?” or “I wasn’t expecting the
Spanish Inquisition.” There is no deliberate intention—and often not
even any awareness—accompanying the activation of these brain
systems.19
On the contrary. In a study of cocaine addicts, research participants’
mesolimbic systems responded to images related to cocaine that
ﬂashed on a screen for thirty-three milliseconds. If you asked them what
they saw, they wouldn’t be able to tell you, because the images ﬂashed
too fast to be “seen” consciously, but it was long enough to light up the
addicts’ eagerness systems.20 The research subjects were not aware ofhaving seen the images, yet their emotional brains responded.

[PDF page 93]

In terms of the garden, this is the diﬀerence between what the
gardener does to the garden . . . and what the garden does all on its
own. The gardener can weed and water and fertilize, but she doesn’t
actually make the plants grow. Your expecting, enjoying, and eagerness
systems are what make the plants grow. All kinds of things inﬂuence
them, including how well you tend them, the weather (that is, the
external circumstances of your life), and how well suited your plants are
to your particular soil (your body and your brakes and accelerator). But
the gardener can’t grit her teeth and make the garden grow; she can
only create the best possible environment for the garden to thrive, and
then let the garden do its thing. Chapters 4, 5, and 9 are about how to
create that sex-positive context.
“is something wrong with me?” (answer: nope)
Sexual arousal, desire, and orgasm change all the time. Sometimes they
change in ways that delight us, and sometimes they change in ways that
puzzle or worry us. Sometimes these changes happen in response to a
change in our sexual hardware—our genitals and the dual control
mechanism. But more often they change in response to a change in our
context—our environment and our mental states. Our mood. Our
relationships. Our lives.
This may be the most important consequence of understanding the
way context inﬂuences how your brain processes sexually relevant
stimuli: When sex doesn’t feel great, it doesn’t mean there’s something
wrong with you. Maybe there’s been a change in your external
circumstances or your other motivational systems (like stress) that’s
inﬂuencing your sexual response. Which means that you can create
positive change without changing you.
Another important consequence of understanding context is that it
helps us understand why women are so diﬀerent from each other. For
many women, the most sex-positive contexts may not be the culturally
sanctioned or readily available ones—such as hookups when you’re in
college or the same old sex for the 1,287th time when you’ve been
married for ten years. For some women, those are great contexts, but for
other women a great, sex-positive context might be an anonymous one-
night hookup against a wall of other people’s coats in a stranger’s closet
at a party. For others it’s the warmly aﬀectionate sex of a long-term,

[PDF page 94]

committed relationship. For some women, it’s a wide range of contexts,
and for others, it’s a narrow window. As long as a woman is attending to
her wellbeing and her partner’s, it doesn’t matter what the context is, as
long as it brings her pleasure.
But if we ignore context, then anyone who ﬁnds sex unfun or whose
desire diminishes may be tempted to conclude she’s broken or just
doesn’t like sex . . . when really all she needs is a better context.
In the right context, sexual behavior is arguably the most pleasurable
experience a human can have. It can bond us with our partners, ﬂood us
with happy chemicals, satisfy deep biological urges, and transport us to
spiritual heights. In the wrong context, though, it can literally feel like
death. Depending on the context, sex can vary almost inﬁnitely, from
delicious to disgusting, from playful to painful—and because of the dual
control mechanism, sometimes it’s two conﬂicting things at the same
time.
As she learned about the relationship between context and her
insensitive accelerator, Camilla decided to think of her low-
sensitivity accelerator in terms of the shower metaphor—the
garden metaphor never really worked for her, but something about
the shower metaphor felt like a good ﬁt. She noticed that romantic,
aﬀectionate contexts, exciting and novel contexts, and low-stress
contexts increased her brain’s sensitivity to sexual cues.
Or, as she put it, “They heat up the water and build up the
pressure.”
And the very best context of all, she thought, was when she felt
pursued. The extended courtship that characterized the earliest
part of her relationship with Henry might have been speciﬁcally
organized around the contextual factors that maximized her
eagerness for sex.
She and Henry talked about it, and they decided to try an
experiment: He would create entire evenings where he courted
Camilla, wooed her, and—eventually—won her. And they learned
something from this that surprised them both: It wasn’t the
pursuing. It was the waiting that turned her on.
The ﬁrst time they tried it, it was a little awkward because she
knew what was coming, so she kept trying to move things along,
to show that she was on board with the plan. When he held her
hand as they walked home from the movie, she tried to kiss him.

[PDF page 95]

But Henry stopped her, slowed her down. When he kissed her,
she tried to deepen the kiss, but again he slowed her down. “I’m
chasing you, remember?” he said. “I can’t chase you if you’re
moving toward me.”
This was the lightbulb moment.
Camilla recognized that what she really needed was time for her
enjoying to grow and expand until ﬁnally it activated her
eagerness. They had been working with the hypothesis that it was
feeling pursued that made her feel desire, but it turned out the real
trick was not the experience of being chased but the amount of
accelerator activation that comes with going slowly, delaying
gratiﬁcation. For her, the process of getting from enjoying to
eagerness is a bit like the ticking pilot light on a gas stove—not
quite enough gas, not quite enough, not quite, until phoof! she
crosses from enjoying into eagerness.
Or—going back to the shower analogy—her accelerator was
like a hot-water heater that took a lot of time to heat the whole
tank. It worked great, it just needed more patience, but it was so
worth the wait.
Camilla and Henry are both careful, thoughtful people,
methodical and slow paced, and this approach appeals to them
deeply. It wouldn’t work for everyone. But great sex isn’t about
doing what works for everyone, it’s about what works for you and
your partner.
In this ﬁrst part of the book, we’ve looked at how your sexual hardware
—your body, your brain, and the context—inﬂuence your overall sexual
wellbeing. We’ve learned that all three elements are made of the same
basic parts in everyone, but each person’s brain, body, and context are
unique. In other words, we each have a unique “garden” in which we
grow our sexual wellbeing.
The next part of the book is about what speciﬁc factors inﬂuence your
context, in terms of your environment and your brain state. These are
like the sun and the rain and—sometimes—compost of your garden.
Some you have control over, some you don’t, and all of them inﬂuence
how your garden thrives. In chapter 4, I’ll talk about two primary
motivational systems—stress and love—and how they can inﬂuence
sexual response in surprising ways. And in chapter 5, I’ll show how
cultural factors in the environment—like social pressure to look or act a

[PDF page 96]

certain way, or moral and media messages about what’s “right” or
“wrong” sexually—can inﬂuence sexual functioning, and how to untangle
the knots that a sex-negative culture ties in our sexual psychologies.
tl;dr
• Your brain’s perception of a sensation is context dependent. Like tickling: If your partner
tickles you when you’re already feeling turned on, it can be fun. But if they tickle you when
you’re angry, it’s just irritating. Same sensation, diﬀerent context—therefore diﬀerent
perception.
• When you’re stressed out, your brain interprets just about everything as a potential
threat. When you’re turned on, your brain could interpret just about anything as sexually
appealing. Because: context!
•  Expecting (anticipating), eagerness (wanting), and enjoying (liking) are separate
functions in your brain. You can want without liking (craving), anticipate without wanting
(dread), or any other combination.
• For most people, the best context for sex is low stress + highly aﬀectionate + explicitly
erotic. Think through your contexts with the worksheets that follow.
sexy contexts
Think of a positive sexual experience from your past. Describe it here,
with as many relevant details as you can recall:
Now consider what aspects of that experience made it positive:
Category Description
Mental and physical wellbeing  
• Physical health
• Body image
• Mood
• Anxiety
• Distractibility

[PDF page 97]

• Worry about sexual functioning
• Other
Partner characteristics 
• Physical appearance
• Physical health
• Smell
• Mental state
• Other
Relationship characteristics 
• Trust
• Power dynamic
• Emotional connection
• Feeling desired
• Frequency of sex
Setting  
• Private/public (at home, work, vacation, etc.)
• Distance sex (phone, chat, etc.)
• See partner do something positive, like interact with family or do work
Other life circumstances  
• Work-related stress
• Family-related stress
• Holiday, anniversary, “occasion”
Things you do  
• Self-guided fantasy
• Partner-guided fantasy (“talking dirty”)
• Body parts that were touched or not
• Oral sex on you/on partner
• Intercourse, etc.

[PDF page 98]

Other
 
sexy contexts
Think of a positive sexual experience from your past. Describe it here,
with as many relevant details as you can recall:
Now consider what aspects of that experience made it positive:
Category Description
Mental and physical wellbeing  
• Physical health
• Body image
• Mood
• Anxiety
• Distractibility
• Worry about sexual functioning
• Other
Partner characteristics 
• Physical appearance
• Physical health
• Smell
• Mental state
• Other
Relationship characteristics 
• Trust

[PDF page 99]

• Power dynamic
• Emotional connection
• Feeling desired
• Frequency of sex
Setting  
• Private/public (at home, work, vacation, etc.)
• Distance sex (phone, chat, etc.)
• See partner do something positive, like interact with family or do work
Other life circumstances  
• Work-related stress
• Family-related stress
• Holiday, anniversary, “occasion”
Things you do  
• Self-guided fantasy
• Partner-guided fantasy (“talking dirty”)
• Body parts that were touched or not
• Oral sex on you/on partner
• Intercourse, etc.
Other
 
sexy contexts
Think of a positive sexual experience from your past. Describe it here,
with as many relevant details as you can recall:

[PDF page 100]

Now consider what aspects of that experience made it positive:
Category Description
Mental and physical wellbeing  
• Physical health
• Body image
• Mood
• Anxiety
• Distractibility
• Worry about sexual functioning
• Other
Partner characteristics 
• Physical appearance
• Physical health
• Smell
• Mental state
• Other
Relationship characteristics 
• Trust
• Power dynamic
• Emotional connection
• Feeling desired
• Frequency of sex
Setting  
• Private/public (at home, work, vacation, etc.)
• Distance sex (phone, chat, etc.)
• See partner do something positive, like interact with family or do work
Other life circumstances  
• Work-related stress
• Family-related stress

[PDF page 101]

• Holiday, anniversary, “occasion”
Things you do  
• Self-guided fantasy
• Partner-guided fantasy (“talking dirty”)
• Body parts that were touched or not
• Oral sex on you/on partner
• Intercourse, etc.
Other
 
not-so-sexy contexts
Think of a not-so-great sexual experience from your past—not
necessarily a terrible one, just a not-so-great one. Describe it here, with
as many relevant details as you can recall:
Now consider what aspects of that experience made it not-so-great:
Category Description
Mental and physical wellbeing
• Physical health
• Body image
• Mood
• Anxiety
• Distractibility
• Worry about sexual functioning
• Other

[PDF page 102]

Partner characteristics 
• Physical appearance
• Physical health
• Smell
• Mental state
• Other
Relationship characteristics 
• Trust
• Power dynamic
• Emotional connection
• Feeling desired
• Frequency of sex
Setting  
• Private/public (at home, work, vacation, etc.)
• Distance sex (phone, chat, etc.)
• See partner do something positive, like interact with family or do work
Other life circumstances  
• Work-related stress
• Family-related stress
• Holiday, anniversary, “occasion”
Things you do  
• Self-guided fantasy
• Partner-guided fantasy (“talking dirty”)
• Body parts that were touched or not
• Oral sex on you/on partner
• Intercourse, etc.
Other

[PDF page 103]

 
not-so-sexy contexts
Think of a not-so-great sexual experience from your past—not
necessarily a terrible one, just a not-so-great one. Describe it here, with
as many relevant details as you can recall:
Now consider what aspects of that experience made it not-so-great:
Category Description
Mental and physical wellbeing
• Physical health
• Body image
• Mood
• Anxiety
• Distractibility
• Worry about sexual functioning
• Other
Partner characteristics 
• Physical appearance
• Physical health
• Smell
• Mental state
• Other
Relationship characteristics 
• Trust
• Power dynamic
• Emotional connection

[PDF page 104]

• Feeling desired
• Frequency of sex
Setting  
• Private/public (at home, work, vacation, etc.)
• Distance sex (phone, chat, etc.)
• See partner do something positive, like interact with family or do work
Other life circumstances  
• Work-related stress
• Family-related stress
• Holiday, anniversary, “occasion”
Things you do  
• Self-guided fantasy
• Partner-guided fantasy (“talking dirty”)
• Body parts that were touched or not
• Oral sex on you/on partner
• Intercourse, etc.
Other
 
not-so-sexy contexts
Think of a not-so-great sexual experience from your past—not
necessarily a terrible one, just a not-so-great one. Describe it here, with
as many relevant details as you can recall:
Now consider what aspects of that experience made it not-so-great:

[PDF page 105]

Category Description
Mental and physical wellbeing
• Physical health
• Body image
• Mood
• Anxiety
• Distractibility
• Worry about sexual functioning
• Other
Partner characteristics 
• Physical appearance
• Physical health
• Smell
• Mental state
• Other
Relationship characteristics 
• Trust
• Power dynamic
• Emotional connection
• Feeling desired
• Frequency of sex
Setting  
• Private/public (at home, work, vacation, etc.)
• Distance sex (phone, chat, etc.)
• See partner do something positive, like interact with family or do work
Other life circumstances  
• Work-related stress
• Family-related stress
• Holiday, anniversary, “occasion”

[PDF page 106]

Things you do  
• Self-guided fantasy
• Partner-guided fantasy (“talking dirty”)
• Body parts that were touched or not
• Oral sex on you/on partner
• Intercourse, etc.
Other
 
sexual cues assessment
Read through all your sexy and not-so-sexy contexts. What do you
notice as reliable contexts for great sex and reliable contexts for not-so-
great sex?
Contexts That Make Sex Great Contexts That Make Sex Not-So-Great
Identify ﬁve things you and/or your partner could do if you decided to
work toward creating more frequent and easier access to the contexts
that improve your sexual functioning.
  Things to doHow much impact?How easy?How soon can you do it?
1.
2.

[PDF page 107]

3.
4.
5.
Now select the two or three that feel like the right combination of impact,
ease, and immediacy, and list all the things that would have to happen in
order for this change to occur. Be as CONCRETE AND SPECIFIC as
you can. These should be ACTIONS rather than abstractions or ideas or
attitudes. Ask yourself, “If we decide to create this change, what goes
on our to-do list?”
Change 1
 
Change 2
 
Change 3
 

[PDF page 108]

Finally, select just one change that you will actually implement. Choose
a start date together that feels like good timing. Ideally this will be within
the next month. Make your plan. AND DO IT!

[PDF page 109]

part 2
sex in context

[PDF page 110]

four
emotional context
SEX IN A MONKEY BRAIN
Women ask me questions, and then they tell me their stories. I
have a whole mental library full of them—hilarious stories of sex
adventures gone awry, sad stories of relationships that couldn’t be
healed, awe-inspiring stories of survival and transcendence. Every
single one is a story of discovery.
Merritt’s story is about survival.
“Why should I trust my body?” she said. “My whole adult life, my
body has been unreliable and falling apart. When I get stressed,
everything just shuts down—I get sick, I get injured, none of my
systems work. And that includes sex.”
This made some sense, given her sensitive brakes, but it
seemed to me there was more going on.
“It sounds like your body is opting for the ‘freeze’ stress
response, where it just shuts down instead of trying to escape or
ﬁght,” I said. “It’s what happens when a person has either long-
term, high-intensity stress, or is in the process of healing after
trauma. Does either of those sound like you?”
“Both,” Carol and Merritt said together.
“You think stress explains why I have a hard time trusting my
body?” Merritt asked me.
I deﬁnitely do.
This chapter is about stress and love and how they aﬀect sexual
pleasure.
Trust your body. Listen to it—not to the speciﬁc circumstances of the
moment but to the deep, primal messages of your evolutionary heritage:
I am at risk/I am safe.

[PDF page 111]

I am broken/I am whole.
I am lost/I am home.
If you’re already awesomely good at that, feel free to skip this chapter.
But if, like most of us, you could use help translating the signals your
body is sending, you’ll ﬁnd this chapter informative. Because it’s not just
the sexual aspects of a context that inﬂuence whether you get turned on.
It’s all the other emotional aspects, including your preexisting emotional
state.
And of all the emotional systems managed by your One Ring, the two
that may have the most immediate impact on sexual pleasure are stress
and love. Stress is the physiological and neurological process that helps
you deal with threats. Love is the physiological and neurological process
that pulls you toward your tribe.
Stress underlies worry, anxiety, fear, terror, all the variants of “Run
away!” But it also underlies anger—irritation, annoyance, frustration,
rage. And to a great extent it underlies the shutdown that characterizes
depression. In the ﬁrst section of this chapter, I’ll present a view of
stress diﬀerent from those you may have heard before: The key to
managing stress (so that it doesn’t mess with your sex life) is not simply
“relaxing” or “calming down.” It’s allowing the stress response cycle to
complete. Allow it to discharge fully. Let your body move all the way
from “I am at risk” to “I am safe.”
In the second part of this chapter, I’ll discuss love. Love, for our
purposes, is attachment, the innate biological mechanism that bonds
humans together. It underlies passion, romance, and the joy of ﬁnding a
partner you can connect with. But it also underlies grief, jealousy, and
heartbreak. Sometimes it’s joyful, like when you’re falling in love.
Sometimes it’s agonizing, like when you’re breaking up. But always
attachment pulls us from “I am broken” to “I am whole.”
And ﬁnally, in the third part of this chapter, I’ll talk about the place
where stress and attachment and sex overlap—the place where we
experience both the passionate, exuberant joy of intense love and also
the agony of the worst interpersonal discord. When stress and
attachment and sex all activate together in our emotional One Ring, they
call, “I am lost,” to motivate us to search and search until we ﬁnd
ourselves in a new place: “I am home.” I’ll describe attachment distress–
fueled sex as “sex that advances the plot,” and introduce ways that we
can use this dynamic to our advantage.

[PDF page 112]

The goal is to help you recognize how the stress response cycle and
the attachment mechanism are integrated in your sexual
responsiveness, and to oﬀer strategies for allowing them to enhance
sexual pleasure, as well as to provide options when they’re impairing
pleasure.
We can understand women’s sexual wellbeing only if we take context
into account—and most of that context has nothing to do with sex itself.
Which means we can improve our sexual wellbeing and expand our
sexual pleasure without directly changing anything about our sex lives!
What I’ve included in this chapter and the next are the contextual factors
that research has shown are consistently associated with changes in
women’s sexual wellbeing. Improve your context, and your sexual
pleasure will expand all on its own.
the stress response cycle: ﬁght, ﬂight, and freeze
Let’s ﬁrst separate your stressors from your stress. Your stressors are
the things that activate the stress response—bills, family, work, fretting
about your sex life, all of that.
Your stress is the system of changes activated in your brain and body
in response to those stressors. It’s an evolutionarily adaptive
mechanism that allows you to respond to perceived threats. Or it was
evolutionarily adaptive, back when our stressors had claws and teeth
and could run thirty miles per hour. These days we are almost never
chased by lions, and yet our body’s response to, say, an incompetent
boss, is largely the same as it would be to a lion. Your physiology
doesn’t diﬀerentiate much. This fact will have important implications for
your sex life, as we’ll soon see.
Stress is usually taught as the ﬁght-or-ﬂight response, but it’s vastly
more helpful—and accurate—to call it by its full description:
ﬁght/ﬂight/freeze. Here’s how it works:
When your brain perceives a threat in the environment, you
experience a massive biochemical change, characterized by ﬂoods of
adrenaline and cortisol to your bloodstream and a cascade of
physiological events, such as increased heart rate, respiration rate, and
blood pressure; suppressed immune and digestive functioning; dilation
of the pupils and shifting of attention to a vigilant state, focused on the
here and now. All these changes are like revving your engine before a

[PDF page 113]

race, or taking a deep breath before you duck underwater—preparation
for the action to come.
What action that will be depends on the nature of the perceived threat
—that is, it’s context dependent.
Suppose the threat is a lion—the kind of threat we were dealing with
in the environment where the mechanism evolved in our early ancestors.
The stress response cycle notices the lion and shouts, “I’m at risk! What
do I do?” A lion, your brain informs you in much less than a second, is
the kind of threat that you are most likely to survive by trying to escape.
So what do you do when you see a lion coming after you?
You feel fear, and you run.
And then what happens?
There are only two possible outcomes, right? Either you get killed by
the lion, in which case none of the rest of this matters, or you escape
and live. So imagine that you successfully run back to your village and
scream for help, and everyone helps you slaughter the lion, and then
you all eat it for dinner, and in the morning you have a respectful burial
service for the parts of the carcass you won’t be using, giving reverent
thanks for the lion’s sacriﬁce.
And how do you feel now?
Relieved! Grateful to be alive! You love your friends and family!
And that is the complete stress response cycle, with beginning (“I’m
at risk!”), middle (action), and end (“I’m safe!”).
•  •  •
Or suppose the threat is a person with an angry expression on his face,
who’s sneaking up behind your best friend, with a little knife in his hand?
Your brain may decide this is a threat you can best survive by
conquering.
You feel anger (“I’m at risk!”—as we’ll see in the attachment section,
the people we love get counted as “ourselves”), and you ﬁght.
And again, you can ﬁght and die or you can ﬁght and live; either way,
you complete the stress response cycle by engaging in a behavior that
eliminates the stressor and the stress.
These two responses, ﬁght and ﬂight, are both accelerator stress—
the sympathetic nervous system, the “GO!” of the stress response. Fight
emerges when your emotional One Ring determines that a stressor
should be conquered. Flight emerges when your One Ring determines a
stressor should be escaped.

[PDF page 114]

But suppose the stressor is one that your brain determines you can’t
survive by escaping and you can’t survive by conquering—you feel the
teeth of the lion bite into you from behind. This is when you get the
brakes stress response—the parasympathetic nervous system, the
“STOP!” activated by the most extreme distress. Your body shuts down;
you may even experience “tonic immobility,” where you can’t move, or
can move only sluggishly. Animals in the wild freeze and fall to the
ground as a last-ditch eﬀort to convince a predator they’re already dead;
Stephen Porges has hypothesized that freeze is a stress response that
facilitates a painless death.1
If an animal survives such an intense threat to its life, then it does an
extraordinary thing: It shakes. It trembles, paws vibrating in the air. It
heaves a great big sigh. And then it gets up, shakes itself oﬀ, and trots
away.
What’s happening here is that freeze has interrupted the GO! stress
response of ﬁght or ﬂight, leaving all that adrenaline-mediated stress to
go stale inside the animal’s body. When the animal shakes and
shudders and sighs, its body is releasing the brake, completing the
activation process triggered by ﬁght/ﬂight, and purging the residue.
Completing the cycle. It’s called “self-paced termination.”2
A friend oﬀered this example of her son waking from anesthesia, after
waiting in the emergency room for ﬁve hours for minor surgery on his
ﬁnger:
“He came out from under the anesthesia ‘very distressed,’ said the nurses. I translate that
to ‘bat shit crazy pants,’ meaning he screamed hysterically, and ﬂailed his arms and legs
wildly, and yelled that he hated me and everyone else, and cycled his legs like mad and
screamed, ‘I just want to run, I just want to run!’ ”
Cycling his legs and “I just want to run!” are ﬂight. Hating everyone is
ﬁght. Anesthesia is medically induced freeze—wild animals who are
anesthetized by researchers experience the same thing as my friend’s
son. I call it “the Feels,” since it’s just this thing that happens in your
body without any obvious environmental cause. The kid wasn’t actually
in any danger, but he had a lot of Feels that needed to work themselves
out. And his mom did exactly the right thing:
“I held him, remained calm, kept telling him I loved him and that I was keeping him safe,
and eventually he calmed down enough to put his clothes on (he’d literally torn them oﬀ)

[PDF page 115]

and leave with me. By the time we were walking into the parking garage, he was calmly
telling me that he loved me very much, and when we got home, he collapsed into sleep.”
He moved through the cycle and got to the relaxation at the end—
aﬀection and sleep.
Only rarely in our everyday lives does unlocking from freeze take such
a dramatic form. But even in its smaller scale, that’s how the stress
response cycle works, beginning, middle, and end, all innately built into
the nervous system and fully functional—in the right context.
stress and sex
By now it won’t strike you as revelatory when I say, “To have more and
better sex, reduce your stress levels.” I might as well say, “Exercise is
good for you” and “Sleep is important.” Of course. You know this.
In fact, more than half of women report that stress, depression, and
anxiety decrease their interest in sex; they also reduce sexual arousal
and can interfere with orgasm.3 Chronic stress also disrupts or
suppresses the menstrual cycle, decreases fertility and lactation, and
increases miscarriage, as well as reducing genital response and
increasing both distractibility and pain with sex.4
How do the hormones and neurochemicals of stress interact with the
hormones and neurochemicals of sexual response, to suppress or
stimulate sexual behavior? Nobody knows precisely—but we know
some things.
We know that stressed-out humans more readily interpret all stimuli
as threats, just like the rats being blasted with bright lights and Iggy Pop.
We also know that the brain can handle only a limited amount of
information at a time; at its simplest, we can think of stress as
information overload, so when there’s too much happening, the brain
starts to triage, prioritizing, simplifying, and even plain old ignoring some
things.
And we know that the brain prioritizes based on survival needs:
breathing, escaping from predators, maintaining the right temperature,
staying hydrated and nourished, and remaining with your social group
are all ﬁrst-order-of-business priorities—and of course these priorities
sort themselves based on context. If you’re starving, you’ll be more
willing to steal bread from your neighbor, even if it risks your

[PDF page 116]

membership in a social group. If you can’t breathe, then it doesn’t matter
how long it’s been since you’ve eaten, you will not feel hungry. And if
you’re generally overwhelmed by twenty-ﬁrst-century life, practically
everything else takes priority over sex; as far as your brain is concerned
everything is a charging lion. And if you’re being chased by a lion, is that
a good time to have sex?
To sum up:
Worry, anxiety, fear, and terror are stress—“There’s a lion! Run!”
Irritation, annoyance, frustration, anger, and rage are stress
—“There’s a lion! Kill it!”
Emotional numbness, shutdown, depression, and despair are stress
—“There’s a lion! Play dead!”
And none of these indicates that now is a good time to get laid.
Stress is about survival. And while sex serves a lot of purposes,
personal survival is not one of them (except when it is—see the
attachment section). So for most people, stress slams on the brakes,
bottoming out sexual interest—except for the 10 to 20 percent or so of
people like Olivia for whom stress activates the accelerator. (All the
same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways.) But even for those folks, stress
blocks sexual pleasure (enjoying) even as it increases sexual interest
(eagerness). Stressed sex feels diﬀerent from joyful sex—you know,
because: context.
To reduce the impact of stress on your sexual pleasure and interest,
to have more joyful, pleasurable sex, manage your stress.
Yeah, easier said than done.
When Olivia was stressed, her interest in sex increased—and it
was a source of conﬂict in her relationship with Patrick, since
when he was stressed, his interest in sex went down. And worse,
sometimes the stress-driven sexual interest made Olivia feel out of
control.
How can she manage that feeling?
By practicing completing the cycle.
My technical description of Olivia’s out-of-control experience is
“maladaptive behavior to manage negative aﬀect”—which just
means trying to cope with uncomfortable emotions (stress,
depression, anxiety, loneliness, rage) by doing things that carry a
high risk of unwanted consequences. Compulsive sexual behavior
is one example. Other examples include

[PDF page 117]

• using alcohol or other drugs in a risky way
• dysfunctional relationships—for instance, trying to deal with
your own feelings by dealing with someone else’s
• escaping into distractions, like movie binge-watching when
you have other things you need to be doing
• disordered eating—restricting, binging, or purging
Of course, all these things can be done in a healthy way. It’s
when we do them instead of dealing with our Feels—that is,
instead of completing the cycle—that they bring the potential for
unwanted consequences. Some of those consequences are fairly
benign . . . and some are could-kill-you-tonight dangerous. And
they’re all intended to do one thing: manage the underlying
feelings. We might do these things when we don’t know how to
complete the cycle or when the feelings just hurt too much.
As a teenager, disordered eating was Olivia’s maladaptive
coping strategy. She would binge eat and then exercise, binge
and exercise. As she recovered from her eating disorder, she
came to realize that her behavior wasn’t really about the shape of
her body—“I needed something to blame for my anxiety, and
cultural brainwashing made my body seem like a good target,” she
said. Instead, her compulsive behavior was an attempt to deal
with feelings that felt too big for her to handle.
She’s been symptom-free for several years. Still, she told me, “I
sometimes walk through doors sideways because I think I’m too
big to ﬁt. When I catch myself doing it, I make myself go through
straight, because what I learned is that it’s not my body that I’m
worried is too big. It’s my anxiety.”
Now she runs, both to manage her stress and as a productive
outlet for her intensity and energy—and she limits herself to one
marathon a year because, she says, “I tend to go overboard, and
it helps if I set limits.”
“I think you’re doing something more profound than just setting
limits,” I said. “I think you’re allowing exercise to help you
complete the cycle instead of hitting the brakes. And you can do
the same thing with sex.”
“I can?”
“Yes.”

[PDF page 118]

She chewed on her lip and nodded her head. Then she said, “I
don’t see it.”
She’ll see it in chapter 5.
broken culture 
  broken stress response cycles
The key to managing stress eﬀectively is to make eﬀorts to complete the
cycle—unlock from freeze, escape the predator, kill the enemy, rejoice.
But stress is more complex in modern humans than in gazelles and
gorillas, for a lot of reasons. First, in modern life, we are, as I mentioned,
almost never chased by lions. Our stressors are lower intensity and
longer duration—“chronic stressors,” they’re called, in contrast to “acute
stressors,” like straightforward predation. Acute stressors have a clear
beginning, middle, and end; completing the cycle—running, surviving,
celebrating—is inherently built in. Not so with chronic stressors. If our
stress is chronic and we don’t take deliberate steps to complete the
cycle, all that activated stress just hangs out inside us, making us sick,
tired, and unable to experience pleasure with sex (or with much of
anything else).
Second, our emotion-dismissing culture is uncomfortable with Feels.
Our culture says that if the stressor isn’t right in front of us, then we have
no reason to feel stressed and so we should just cut it out already. As a
result, most people’s idea of “stress management” is either to eliminate
all stressors or to just relax, as if stress can be turned oﬀ like a light
switch. Our culture is so uncomfortable with Feels that we may even
sedate people who’ve just been in a car accident, preventing their
bodies from moving through this natural process; this well-intentioned
medical intervention has the unwanted consequence of trapping
survivors of traumatic injury in freeze, which is how PTSD gets a
foothold in a survivor’s brain.5
But third, even without medication and an emotion-dismissing culture,
our ultrasocial human brains are really good at self-inhibition, stopping
the stress response midcycle because, “Now is not an appropriate time
for Feels.” We use this self-inhibition in order to facilitate social
cooperation—i.e., not freak anybody out. But unfortunately, our culture
has eliminated all appropriate times for Feels. We’ve locked ourselves,
culturally, into our own fear, rage, and despair. We must build time,
space, and strategies for discharging our stress response cycles.

[PDF page 119]

complete the cycle!
How?
Well, just as you can’t grit your teeth and make a garden grow, you
can’t force a stress response cycle to complete. Completing the cycle
requires that, instead of hitting the brake on our stress, we gently
remove our foot from both the accelerator and the brake and allow
ourselves to coast to a stop.6 To do that, you create the right context
and trust your body to do its thing.
So what’s the right context?
Think about what your body recognizes as the behaviors that save
you from lions. When you’re being chased by a lion, what do you do?
You run.
So when you’re stressed out by your job (or by your sex life), what do
you do?
You run . . . or walk, or get on the elliptical machine or go out dancing
or even just dance around your bedroom. Physical activity is the single
most eﬃcient strategy for completing the stress response cycle and
recalibrating your central nervous system into a calm state. When
people say, “Exercise is good for stress,” that is for realsie real.7
Here are some other things that science says can genuinely help us
not only “feel better” but actually facilitate the completion of the stress
response cycle: sleep; aﬀection (more on that in the next section); any
form of meditation, including mindfulness, yoga, tai chi, body scans, etc.
(more on that in chapter 9); and allowing yourself a good old cry or
primal scream—though you have to be careful with this one. Sometimes
people just wallow in their stress when they cry, rather than allowing the
tears to wash away the stress. If you’ve ever locked yourself in your
room and sobbed for ten minutes, and then at the end heaved a great
big sigh and felt tremendously relieved, you’ve felt how it can move you
from “I am at risk” to “I am safe.”
Art, used in the same way, can help. When mental health
professionals suggest journaling or other expressive self-care, they don’t
mean that the construction of sentences or the task of drawing is
inherently therapeutic; rather, they’re encouraging you to ﬁnd positive
contexts to discharge your stress, through the creative process.
I’m inclined to add grooming and other body self-care to the list.
Though I’m not familiar with any speciﬁc research on it, I’ve talked with
lots of women for whom showering and the rituals, part social, part

[PDF page 120]

meditative, of painting their nails or doing their hair or putting on makeup
—generally “getting ready” to go out (or stay in)—fully transition them
from a stressed-out state of mind to a warm, social state of mind. These
anecdotes aren’t data, but I’m inclined to call them evidence and say,
Yeah, spend time treating yourself with aﬀection.
I have a pet theory that these rituals and behaviors are related to
“self-kindness,” which I’ll be talking about in chapter 5, but to my
knowledge no one has ever speciﬁcally measured it.8 Anyway, our fellow
apes eat insects out of each other’s fur; maybe bath bombs and body
glitter are the modern human equivalent.
Everybody has something that works—and everyone’s strategy is
diﬀerent. Whatever strategy you use, take deliberate steps to complete
the cycle. Allow yourself to coast to the end without hitting the brake.
Emotions are like tunnels: You have to walk all the way through the
darkness to get to the light at the end. I say this so often my students
sometimes roll their eyes: “Not the tunnel again.” Yes, the tunnel again.
Because it’s true.
There’s a worksheet at the end of this chapter to help you think
through eﬀective strategies for reducing your stress.
While you’re ﬁguring out what strategies help, pay attention to your
patterns of self-inhibition, and identify places and people who create
space for you to have Feels. Some of those patterns of self-inhibition are
important and unchangeable—for example, carefully consider any plan
that involves crying at work. But some of them will be self-defeating, and
everyone needs at least one place in their life where they can just Have
All The Feels without worrying about being judged or freaking people
out. Find that place and those people.
A ﬁnal caution: Too often, we mistake dealing with the stressors for
dealing with the stress. A couple years ago the leaders of the campus
Peer Sex Educators sat in my oﬃce, reporting how well their
Sextravaganza events had gone. They had worked for months and their
eﬀorts were rewarded with a spectacular success, but they looked
exhausted and stunned and said, “Sextravaganza is over! Why do we
still feel exactly as stressed out as we did the day it started?!”
“Because you’ve dealt with the stressor,” I said, “but not the stress.
Your bodies still think you’re being chased by the lion.”
Solution: Do things that communicate to your body, “You have
escaped and survived!”

[PDF page 121]

• Physical activity
• Sharing aﬀection
• Primal scream or a good cry
• Progressive muscle relaxation or other sensorimotor meditation
• Body self-care, like grooming, massage, or doing your nails
The dance major chose physical activity, and the study of women and
gender major organized a big group primal scream.
when sex becomes the lion
Beyond the day-to-day stressors of life are the deep wounds that life
inﬂicts and sometimes does not provide opportunities to heal. Given the
prevalence of trauma of all kinds, especially sexual trauma—a
conservative estimate is that one in ﬁve women is sexually assaulted in
her lifetime, and it could be more like one in three9—it’s impossible to
talk about women’s sexual health without spending some time
discussing trauma. From child sexual abuse to sexual assault to all
forms of interpersonal violence, women are disproportionately and
systematically targeted, and thus they disproportionately bring to their
sexual functioning the emotional, physical, and cognitive features of a
trauma survivor. In other words, if women have more “issues” than men
around sex, there’s good reason.
(If you’re a survivor and still working through your experience, you
may prefer to skip ahead to the next section.)
Trauma results when a person has control over her body taken from
her, she freezes, and then she can’t unlock. Whether the cause is a car
accident or sexual violence, the survival mechanism kicks in: freeze, the
petriﬁed shutdown characterized by numbness and sometimes tonic
immobility (paralysis) or a sense of disembodiment. Some people
describe it as “going into shock.” This is the life-threat stress response,
activated when your brain decides you can’t escape a stressor, nor can
you ﬁght it. It’s reserved for the most dangerous and violent contexts.
Rape has been described by victim advocate and former police oﬃcer
Tom Tremblay as “the most violent crime a person can survive.”10
Those who have not been sexually assaulted can perhaps most clearly
understand the experience of a survivor by thinking of them as having
survived an attempted murder that used sex as the weapon.

[PDF page 122]

Sexual violence often doesn’t look like what we think of as
“violence”—only rarely is there a gun or knife; often there isn’t even
“aggression” as we typically think of it. There is coercion and the
removal of the targeted person’s choice about what will happen next.
Survivors don’t “ﬁght” because the threat is too immediate and
inescapable; their bodies choose “freeze” because it’s the stress
response that maximizes the chances of staying alive . . . or of dying
without pain.
Trauma isn’t always caused by one speciﬁc incident. It can also
emerge in response to persistent distress or ongoing abuse, like a
relationship where sex is unwanted, though it may be technically
“consensual” because the targeted person says yes in order to avoid
being hurt or feels trapped in the relationship or is otherwise coerced. In
that context, a survivor’s body gradually learns that it can’t escape and it
can’t ﬁght; freeze becomes the default stress response because of the
learned pattern of shutdown as the best way to guarantee survival.
Each person’s experience of survival is unique, but it often includes a
kind of disengaged unreality. And afterward, that illusion of unreality
gradually degrades, disintegrating under the weight of physical
existence and burdened memory. The tentative recognition that this
thing has actually happened incrementally unlocks the panic and rage
that couldn’t ﬁnd their way to the surface before, buried as they were
under the overmastering mandate to survive.
But survival is not recovery; survival happens automatically,
sometimes even against the survivor’s will. Recovery requires an
environment of relative security and the ability to separate the physiology
of freeze from the experience of fear, so that the panic and the rage can
discharge, completing their cycles at last.
Neither Camilla nor Henry had a history of trauma themselves, but
Henry—the nice guy, the gentleman—had a previous girlfriend
who was sexually assaulted while they were dating.
We don’t talk about trauma survivorship enough, and we talk
even less about cosurvivorship, the emotional work of supporting
a survivor. In the Western world, relatively few men—the research
indicates only about 5 percent—perpetrate the overwhelming
majority of assaults,11 but a lot of men have partners who have
survived an assault. And yet we do almost nothing to teach men

[PDF page 123]

how to support survivors as intimate partners, or how to take care
of themselves as cosurvivors.
Henry was barely aware of how his previous partner’s trauma
aﬀected his approach to sex until he and Camilla developed their
plan of him “chasing” her. It felt awkward for him because he loved
her enthusiastic desire more than anything else, but—remember
the ticking pilot light—Camilla needed a lot of warming up before
she could feel that enthusiastic desire.
How could he know she was into it? Is it really desire and
consent if she “wants to want” sex, rather than plain old wanting
sex?
Camilla helped him out by talking about the brakes and
accelerator:
“I don’t have a sensitive brake, I have a stubborn gas pedal. I’m
a fully loaded moving van, accelerating from a dead stop at the
bottom of a hill. But moving forward slowly isn’t the same as
wanting to stop, right? All I need is something really awesome
waiting for me at the top of the hill. And you already know I’ll tell
you when something feels good. Surely you trust me to tell you if
something hits the brakes.”
“Sure,” he said.
“Well, then.”
And there was one of those silences—you know, where
someone’s brain is turning over an idea like a puzzle piece,
ﬁguring out where it ﬁts in the overall picture.
“Moving forward slowly isn’t the same as wanting to stop,” he
repeated. “You have a slow hot-water heater, a ticking pilot light.”
“That’s right.”
“And you’ll tell me if you want to stop.”
“Darn skippy.”
Henry the gentleman, Henry the geek, nodded slowly. “I think I
got it.”
(He gets it slightly wrong in chapter 6, but I promise there’s a
happy ending.)
sex and the survivor

[PDF page 124]

Sexual trauma survivorship impacts information processing for both the
accelerator and the brake. Sensations, contexts, and ideas that used to
be interpreted as sexually relevant may instead now be interpreted by
your brain as threats, so that sexy contexts actually hit the brakes. And
the chronically high levels of stress activity in a recovering survivor’s
brain can block out sexual stimuli, categorizing them as low priority.
Sometimes, too, survivors ﬁnd themselves locked in a pattern of
sexual behavior. Their brains become compulsive about undoing the
trauma, redoing it diﬀerently, or simply understanding it. Like biting on a
cold sore or squeezing a pimple, the brain can’t leave the trauma alone,
even though you know you’d heal faster if you could. The result is that
the survivor has multiple partners, often following a habitual pattern,
without feeling perfectly in control of the decision to have those partners.
If you’re a trauma survivor, chances are you’ve either done a bunch of
emotional work to move through the trauma, or else you’ve got some
work ahead of you. If your trauma is recent or feels unresolved (for
example, if reading the previous section made your heart pound), you’ll
probably beneﬁt from a more intensive level of support than this book
can oﬀer. Therapy would probably be great. And there are books
speciﬁcally about sex as a survivor, including Healing Sex: A Mind-
Body Approach to Healing Sexual Trauma by Staci Haines and The
Sexual Healing Journey: A Guide for Survivors of Sexual Abuse by
Wendy Maltz.
If the trauma is not recent and is more or less resolved, it’s normal for
you to experience residual eﬀects on your sexual functioning, even when
you are largely recovered. Sexual trauma tends to wrap tendrils around
so many parts of your emotional experience that you ﬁnd it
unexpectedly, like a persistent invasive weed that has to be pulled and
pulled again.
There are three broad approaches to coping with these residual bits
of trauma. We might call them “top-down,” or a cognitive, thought-based
approach; “bottom-up,” or a somatic, body-based approach; and
“sideways,” a mindfulness-based approach.12
Top-Down: Processing the Trauma. There are several diﬀerent forms
of cognitive-based therapy—cognitive behavioral therapy, cognitive
processing therapy, dialectical behavioral therapy, etc. They all involve
some degree of recognizing the meaning that you’ve created around the
trauma and then challenging belief patterns within that meaning, or

[PDF page 125]

recognizing behavioral habits that you’ve trained yourself into since the
trauma and challenging those patterns.
They require ﬁrst that you become aware of the patterns, whether of
thought or behavior, and then that you develop skills to replace those
patterns with new ones. Allow yourself to feel those old feelings, but
now, instead of engaging in the habitual self-defensive patterns, begin
practicing new patterns. In the process of changing the patterns, the
residual trauma will emerge. Know that you can feel all your Feels and
still be safe. Know that you did everything you could in that moment to
protect yourself; grant yourself forgiveness for the things you may still
blame yourself for, recognizing that the trauma is the fault of the
perpetrator alone. And imagine yourself as you are now, safe and whole,
sitting quietly—or imagine yourself embracing yourself as you were
then, oﬀering yourself the comfort and security you needed then, with
reassurance that you survived, that your life got better. This is your new
pattern: Allow the feelings to move through you.
Bottom-Up: Processing Your Body. If the idea of analyzing your
patterns of thought and behavior is unappealing to you, you may prefer
a body-based therapy, such as sensorimotor therapy13 or Somatic
Experiencing (SE).14 These approaches can stand alone as a powerfulway to heal your relationship with your body and your sexuality post
trauma, and they can also complement other approaches.
When I spoke with SE practitioner Kristen Chamberlin, she pointed
out that body-based therapies move slowly into mainstream practice
because we don’t have a cultural framework for the body’s natural
processing of physiological stress (completing the cycle). As a culture,
we don’t trust our bodies, so we override them, which makes us
vulnerable to maladaptive coping strategies, as Olivia experienced.
In Chamberlin’s practice, she said, the question is, “How do we work
with the organic intelligence of the body to heal? Instead of managing
what comes up from the body, we work with it, trusting its purpose and
direction, while holding a very particular, healing framework. The result
is that physiological stress can change and release.” This is good news,
since so many roadblocks in our sexual relationships are symptoms of
unprocessed physiological stress. When we release the old, incomplete
stress responses, we make space for new movement where we once
felt stuck.
And when you ﬁnd the stuckness, simply grant it kind, patient, gentle
attention. The stuckness will change in the warmth of your attention, it

[PDF page 126]

will melt like snow under the sun. Let it. Emotions are physiological
cascades that want to complete their cycles, and they will complete
those cycles when you allow them to; they want to be travelers, not
residents. They want to move on. Let them. You may tremble or shake
or cry or curl up in a ball. You may notice your body doing these things
without your volition. Your body knows what to do, and it will do it as
long as you sit calmly with it, as you would sit calmly beside a sick or
grieving child.
Sideways: Mindfulness. Perhaps the gentlest approach is the most
indirect. Without ever addressing the trauma directly, you can simply
begin practicing mindfulness, and gradually the trauma will work its way
out, like shrapnel from an old wound. There are spectacular books on
the practice of mindfulness. One of my favorites is The Mindful Way
through Depression by Mark Williams, John Teasdale, Zindel Segal,
and Jon Kabat-Zinn. Don’t let the “through depression” part throw you;
it’s a practical guide to managing any uncomfortable emotional
experience.
Here’s the short version of how to practice mindfuless:
1. Start with two minutes. For two minutes a day, direct your attention to your breath: the
way the air comes into your body and your chest and belly expand, and the way the breath
leaves your body and your chest and belly deﬂate.
2. The ﬁrst thing that will happen is your mind will wander to something else. That’s
normal. That’s healthy. That’s actually the point. Notice that your mind wandered, let those
extraneous thoughts go—you can return to them as soon as the two minutes are up—and
allow your attention to return to your breath.
3. Noticing that your mind wandered and then returning your attention to your breath is the
real work of mindfulness. It’s not so much about paying attention to your breath as it is
about noticing what you’re paying attention to without judgment, and making a choice
about whether you want to pay attention to it. What you’re “mindful” of is both your breath
and your attention to your breath. By practicing this skill of noticing what you’re paying
attention to, you are teaching yourself to be in control of your brain, so that your brain is
not in control of you.
This regular two-minute practice will gradually result in periodic
moments throughout the day when you notice what you’re paying
attention to and then decide if that’s what you want to pay attention to
right now, or if you want to pay attention to something else. What you
pay attention to matters less than how you pay attention.

[PDF page 127]

This is a sideways strategy for weeding trauma out of your garden. It’s
a way of simply noticing a weed and then deciding if you want to water it
or not, pull it or not, fertilize it or not. The weed of trauma will gradually
disappear as long as at least half the time you choose not to nurture it.
And the more you choose to withdraw your protection from the trauma,
the faster it will wither and die.
Mindfulness is good for everyone and everything. It is to your mind
what exercise and green vegetables are to your body. If you change only
one thing in your life as a result of reading this book, make it this daily
two-minute practice. The practice grants the opportunity to “cultivate
deep respect for emotions,” diﬀerentiating their causes from their eﬀects
and granting you choice over how you manage them.15
origin of love
Aristophanes, in Plato’s Symposium—and for those of you who very
understandably just fell asleep, replace that with the song “The Origin of
Love” from John Cameron Mitchell’s Hedwig and the Angry Inch—
oﬀers this parable about why humans love:
Human beings used to be round, with two faces, four arms, four legs,
and two sets of genitals. Some of us were two men, some were two
women, and some were a man and a woman. But the gods wanted to
have more control over us, so Zeus cut us in half with a bolt of lightning,
and from that moment, we were susceptible to a suﬀering that slices, as
Hedwig sings it, “a straight line/down through the heart.”16
Love, according to the parable, is the pursuit of our own wholeness.
We wander the earth in search of our lost half. And when two halves ﬁnd
each other, as Aristophanes says,
“the pair are lost in an amazement of love and friendship and intimacy, and one will not be
out of the other’s sight, as I may say, even for a moment: these are the people who pass
their whole lives together; yet they could not explain what they desire of one another.”
This isn’t actually why we fall in love, but it’s closer than you might
think. Why we fall in love is attachment, which is sort of a biological
pursuit of wholeness.
Attachment is the evolutionarily adaptive emotional mechanism that
bonds infants and adult caregivers. I think human childbirth readily ﬁts

[PDF page 128]

the description of pain that feels like you’re being separated from a part
of yourself. And then, as Christopher Hitchens puts it, when you’re a
parent, “your heart is running around inside someone else’s body.”17
Babies attach, too, always seeking closeness with the adults who
care for them. From birth, attachment is the pursuit of our own
wholeness—being kept safe, and keeping safe that part of ourselves
that lives in someone else’s body. Attachment is love.
When we reach adolescence, our attachment mechanism gets co-
opted from parental attachment to peer attachment, in romantic
relationships. There are certain attachment behaviors we engage in that
innately activate the attachment mechanism, whether between infant
and caregiver or between two adults falling in love: eye contact, smiling,
face stroking, hugging, that kind of thing. But with the shift at
adolescence, sexual behavior is added to the repertoire of attachment
behaviors.
Brain imaging research has found that the mesolimbic systems
(eagerness/enjoying/expecting from chapter 3) during a nondistressed
experience of parental attachment are extremely similar to the
experience of romantic attachment—and they’re especially heavy on the
enjoying activation, rather than eagerness activation.18 At the sametime, attachment is why we experience “heartbreak.” As infants, our
lives literally depend on our adult caregivers coming when we need
them. As adults, that’s no longer true, but our bodies don’t know it. Our
bodies are pretty sure that if our attachment object doesn’t come back,
we’ll die.
So yeah, love feels good—“I am whole.”
Except when it hurts like you’re dying—“I am broken.”
Because: attachment.
the science of falling in love
In practice, humans build important social connections with multiple
people, and our sense of wholeness emerges both from our own inner
sense of wholeness and from our connection with our friends and family,
as well as with our partner. But there is the particular experience of
“falling in love” or “bonding” with one speciﬁc person that typiﬁes what
our culture has come to consider “love.” If you’ve ever had a kid or fallen

[PDF page 129]

in love, you’ll recognize the narrative of attachment, the series of
behavioral markers that characterize the attachment process.
Proximity Seeking. You feel connected to the other person, so that it
feels good to be around them (enjoying) and you want (eagerness) to be
close as much as possible. Most parents have experienced proximity
seeking in the form of little toddler ﬁngers under the bathroom door,
while you try to have thirty seconds in a row of alone-time as you pee. In
romantic relationships, proximity can take the form of Twitter, texting,
phone calls, and email, as well as walking past their locker six times
every day to see if they are there, or leaving work early to get home
sooner.
Safe haven. When things go wrong in your life, you want to tell your
attachment object all about it; you seek out that person for support. In
adult relationships, it’s the phone call to your partner after a long, hard
day at work. When your stress response is activated, your attachment
mechanism says, “Soothe your stress by connecting with your
attachment object.” This is the “tend and befriend” dynamic, which I’ll
talk about more later.
Separation Distress. When the person goes away, you feel pain—you
miss that person. For adults, it’s the aching loneliness while your partner
is away at a conference. It’s okay for a while . . . and then it’s too much,
too long, too far.
Secure Base. Wherever that person is, that’s your emotional home.
Any adult who has come home from a business trip and fallen onto the
couch next to a partner, to hold hands and make eye contact while
talking about what happened while they were separated, has
experienced this.
A real-life example: My sister Amelia’s husband is a high school music
teacher, and every other year he accompanies his choir to Europe for a
week or two. And every year during that time, she sits around feeling
what she identiﬁes as “homesick,” even though she’s the one at home.
Because he is her emotional home, her secure base. So she
experiences separation distress.
Amelia’s favorite book is Jane Eyre. Mr. Rochester, the hero of that
story, expresses attachment and separation distress when he says to
Jane:
“I sometimes have a queer feeling with regard to you—especially when you are near me,
as now: it is as if I had a string somewhere under my left ribs, tightly and inextricably

[PDF page 130]

knotted to a similar string situated in the corresponding quarter of your little frame. And if
that boisterous Channel [the Irish Sea], and two hundred miles or so of land come broad
between us, I am afraid that cord of communion will be snapt; and then I’ve a nervous
notion I should take to bleeding inwardly.”
attachment and sex: the dark side
Mr. Rochester’s words hint at the place where attachment and stress
overlap: distressed relationships.
In the previous chapter I mentioned John Gottman’s stories from
women in abusive relationships, who said that some of the best sex
followed immediately after acts of violence, and Isabel in What Do
Women Want?, who craved sex with a commitment-phobic ex but
lacked desire for her awesome current boyfriend. Both of these puzzles
make perfect sense when we understand attachment-driven sex when
the attachment is threatened.
Attachment is about survival; relationships are about survival. When
they are threatened, we do whatever it takes to hold on to them,
because there are no higher stakes than our connection with our
attachment objects.
I’ll illustrate this idea with some of the darkest and most disturbing
science I’ve ever read—it’s disturbing precisely because it shows us
how powerfully attachment aﬀects the emotional wellbeing of mammals
like us. In Harry Harlow’s series of “monster mother” studies, conducted
in the middle of the twentieth century, his research team invented
mechanical “mothers,” to which infant rhesus monkeys attached. Once
the infants were emotionally attached to the monster mothers, the
mechanical devices shook the infants, spiked them, or jetted cold air
onto them, to force the babies away.
And what did the infant monkeys do when their “mothers” treated
them badly, shook them oﬀ, rejected them?
They ran back to their mothers.
In an episode of the radio show This American Life, Deborah Blum,
author of a biography of Harlow, Love at Goon Park, puts it this way:
The [rhesus monkey] babies came back and they did everything they could to make those
mothers love them again. And they cooed, and they stroked, and they’d groom, and they’d

[PDF page 131]

ﬂirt, and exactly what human babies do with their moms. And they would abandon their
friends. They had to ﬁx this relationship. It was so important to them.19
Of course they did. When we feel distressed, our attachment object is
our safe haven. Even—or perhaps especially—if our attachment object
is the source of our distress.
And just as the baby rhesus monkeys used attachment behaviors to
repair their relationships with their monster mothers, women in unstable
relationships may use sex as an attachment behavior to build or repair
the attachment. So what Isabel “wanted,” to answer Bergner’s titular
question, was proximity with her attachment object, in the face of
separation anxiety. The hormones dopamine and oxytocin were having
their wicked way with her eagerness system, pushing her toward the
attachment object who would never commit to her and who therefore
chronically activated her attachment system’s need for safe haven.20
This is the dark side of pairing stress and attachment: the “I am lost”
feeling, which motivates us to stabilize our connection with our
attachment object—“I am home.” Therapist and author Sue Johnson
calls this “solace sex,” sex that’s motivated by your desire to prove that
you are loved.21
Now in a relationship with a man who is kind and attentive and
committed, Isabel’s “I am lost” ﬁre is not burning—which is a good
thing!—and it can’t, therefore, ignite desire. Which doesn’t feel so good.
Solution? Isabel needs to advance the plot.
attachment and sex: sex that advances the plot
We never get to see Jane Eyre and Mr. Rochester have sex, but I
imagine it would be similar to the sex in modern romance novels,
metaphorizing penile-vaginal intercourse in terms of that “pursuit of
wholeness.” As if Edward Rochester’s penis is the key to the lock of
Jane’s vagina, which opens the door to her heart. Modern romance
novels thrive on this kind of thing.
Many romance novels these days are not like Jane Eyre or Pride and
Prejudice. They have sex in them. A lot of sex. Some of them have so
much sex, they’re basically Porn For The Ladies. But the best romance
novels are the ones where the sex isn’t just gratuitous for the sake of
entertainment. In the best romances, the sex advances the plot,

[PDF page 132]

carrying the hero and heroine, against all odds and in the face of many
obstacles, through one of the behavioral markers of attachment.
As just one example, the heroine of Laura Kinsale’s Flowers from the
Storm keeps trying to leave the hero and return to her father, but as she
rides away she grows “more uneasy every mile” (separation distress)
“until she turn[s] her back on her father and return[s]” to the hero
(proximity seeking) and reunites with him, with, ahem, “rough vigor.”22
Romance novels are about the narrative of stressed attachment, from
“I am lost” to “I am home,” and sex has a starring role as an attachment
behavior.
I’ve been discussing this idea of sex that advances the plot with my
women friends, and every time, their eyes widen and they say
something like, “And after you’re married, the story’s over. Happy
ending, no more plot. Oh.”
Which . . . yeah. But it makes the solution obvious. Add more plot!
So if you’re thinking to yourself, “Oh, crap, that means that only in
either brand-new or else dysfunctional relationships will the sex ever be
exciting,” there’s good news—and also bad news, and then more good
news.
The ﬁrst good news is that sex you crave often isn’t sex that feels
good—remember, enjoying and eagerness are not the same thing. Sue
Johnson describes this “solace sex” as “soothing but unerotic,” in
contrast to “sealed-oﬀ sex,” which is “erotic but empty.”23 Solace sexcan feel like a relief, because you’re easing fear. But let’s not mistake
relief for pleasure.
Like imagine that you need to pee really, really badly, and you have to
wait and wait, and then ﬁnally you pee, and it’s almost pleasurable
because it’s such an intense relief. Sex to advance the plot in unstable
relationships is like that. It doesn’t feel good when you experience fear
and instability in your relationship, just as it doesn’t feel good to have to
pee really badly. It just feels like a relief when you can ﬁnally do
something about it.
And don’t we want our relationships and our sex lives to be about
more than just . . . relief?
So the good news is that if you’re missing this kind of intense craving
for sex in your relationship, it’s no loss.
The bad news is that, yes, most of us will ﬁnd it easier to crave sex,
for what that’s worth, when our relationships are unstable—either new or
threatened. But the second good news is that there’s a bunch of

[PDF page 133]

spectacular research on what people can do to increase their craving
and pleasure (eagerness and enjoying) with sex in a stable, happy
relationship. I’ll talk about how to do this in chapter 7, but ﬁrst let’s come
to grips with the individual diﬀerences that inﬂuence how you manage
attachment in your relationship.
When Laurie told me about her vacation ﬁasco and the ugly cry
surprise, I asked, “What happened after the hot and dirty sex?”
She said, “I fell asleep for three hours . . . which was almost as
good as the sex. I just wish I hadn’t had to cry to make it happen.”
“It sounds to me like crying let you discharge the accumulated
stress that was hitting your brake, which freed up your
accelerator.”
“Oh. Hm. So are you saying that to have more sex, I should cry
even more than I already do?”
“It deﬁnitely sounds like you need more opportunities to
discharge more of your stress,” I said. “Especially since you don’t
have much leeway for getting rid of your stressors. And Johnny is
your attachment object, right? He’s where you turn when you’re
stressed, and your body totally wants to give and receive aﬀection
with him, right?”
“Right.”
“So can I make a suggestion?”
“Yes, please. Anything.”
“Stop. Having. Sex. Make it a rule: no sex for . . . oh, like, a
month? You clearly want to give and to receive aﬀection with your
attachment object, but the stress of your life is hitting the brakes,
and the bonus worry about feeling like you should be having sex
just makes it worse. So until you work out more eﬀective strategies
for managing your stress, make a rule against all genital touching.”
“That doesn’t make sense. How am I helping our sex life by
ending our sex life?”
“You’re not ending it. You’re changing the context.”
“Which still doesn’t make sense to me. We go away together
and just get mad at each other; I cry all over Johnny and we get
busy.”
“Friend, I am not in charge of what context works for you—and
neither are you. But the common denominator here is stress of all
kinds, including—especially—stress about the fact that stress is

[PDF page 134]

hitting your brakes. So stop stressing about the fact that stress is
hitting your brakes. Accept it. Welcome it. It’s completely normal.
You’re just in a rotten context, so change the context and see what
happens.”
She sighed, then went home and talked to Johnny. They tried it.
I’ll talk about what happened in chapter 5. For now, I’ll just say
that one powerful way of changing the context is to take away the
stress of performance anxiety that comes with feeling obligated to
have sex.
attachment style
Whom we attach to as adults and how we attach—our attachment
“style”—is shaped by the way we were parented.
At their broadest, we can describe attachment styles as either secure
or insecure. Remember that infants’ lives literally depend on their adult
caregivers, so eﬀectively managing potential abandonment is a serious
issue for babies. We attach securely when our adult caregivers (usually
our parents) are pretty reliably there for us when we need them. We cry,
they come. We turn around, they’re there. No adult caregiver is always
there, unfailingly, no matter what, but when they’re there reliably
enough, we attach securely. Under these conditions, our brains learn
that our adult caregivers will come back when they leave; they will not
abandon us.
Kids who are securely attached to their adult caregivers will, as
adults, most likely attach securely to their romantic partners, and kids
who are insecurely attached to their adult caregivers will, as adults,
mostly likely attach insecurely to their romantic partners.
But if parents are under extreme stress or have lots of other children
to take care of or have an active drug or alcohol addiction or mood or
personality disorder, they won’t necessarily be present, physically or
emotionally, when the child needs them. When our adult caregivers are
less reliable, we attach insecurely.
We can think of insecure attachment as ﬁtting into two diﬀerent
strategies: anxious and avoidant. With an anxious attachment style, you
cope with the risk that your attachment object might abandon you by
clinging desperately to them. Anxiously attached children get jealous
and experience intense separation distress; so do anxiously attached

[PDF page 135]

adults. People with an avoidant attachment style cope with the risk that
their attachment object might abandon them by not attaching seriously
to any speciﬁc individual. Avoidant children don’t prefer their parents to
other adults; avoidant adults, according to the research, are more likely
to approve of and have anonymous sex.
About half of people in the United States develop secure attachment
styles, and half develop insecure styles.24 Attachment style isn’t aﬀected
by gender—men and women are equally likely to be secure, avoidant, or
anxious.25
To give you a more speciﬁc sense of what the styles are like, here are
the kinds of statements researchers use to assess attachment style in
adults:26
Secure Attachment Anxious Attachment Avoidant Attachment
• I feel comfortable sharing my
private thoughts and feelings
with my partner.
• I’m afraid I will lose my
partner’s love.
• I prefer not to show a
partner how I feel deep
down.
• I rarely worry about my partner
leaving me.
• I often worry that my partner
will not want to stay with me.
• I ﬁnd it diﬃcult to allow
myself to depend on
romantic partners.
• I am very comfortable being
close to romantic partners.
• I often worry that my partner
doesn’t really love me.
• I don’t feel comfortable
opening up to romantic
partners.
• It helps to turn to my romantic
partner in times of need.
• I worry that romantic partners
won’t care about me as much
as I care about them.
• I prefer not to be too close
with romantic partners.
Now, if you had to guess who has a more satisfying sex life, folks with
a secure attachment style or folks with an insecure attachment style,
whom would you guess?
Of course. Secure attachment folks. By a mile.
A 2012 review of the research on the relationship between sex and
attachment found that secure attachment was associated with every
domain of sexual wellbeing you can imagine. Secure attachers have
more positive emotions during sex, more frequent sex, higher levels of
arousal and orgasm, and better communication about sex.27 They are
better at giving and receiving consent and are more likely to engage in
safer sex practices such as contraception use; they enjoy sex more, are

[PDF page 136]

more attentive to their partners’ needs, feel a link between sex and love,
are more likely to have sex in the context of a committed relationship,
and are more sexually self-conﬁdent. Secure attachers have the
healthiest, most pleasurable sex lives.
People with anxious attachment styles are the most likely to engage in
anxiety-driven “solace sex”—that is, using sex as an attachment
behavior—which can make sex intense without making it pleasurable.
Anxious attachers worry more about sex, and yet they also equate the
quality of sex with the quality of a relationship. They’re more likely to
experience pain with sex, particularly in low-intimacy relationships.
They’re less likely to use condoms, more likely to use alcohol or other
drugs before sex and, unsurprisingly, have higher rates of STIs and
unwanted pregnancy. Anxious attachers experience more pain, anxiety,
and health risks.
People with insecure attachment styles, anxious or avoidant, are more
likely to be involved on either side of a coercive sexual relationship.
People with avoidant attachment start having sex later in life, have sex
less often, with fewer noncoital behaviors. They have more positive
attitudes toward sex outside committed relationships, have more one-
night stands, and are more likely to have sex just to ﬁt into a social
expectation rather than because they really want to. Avoidant attachers
experience sex as less connected with their lives and their relationships.
In the end, insecure attachment interferes with sex. We can’t
understand sexual wellbeing without understanding attachment, and we
can’t maximize our own sexual wellbeing without learning how to
manage attachment in our relationships.
managing attachment: your feels as a sleepy hedgehog
Attachment style is an inescapable factor in sexual response and
relationship satisfaction—and it varies not just from person to person but
also from relationship to relationship.28 And it can change.29 These deep
emotional patterns are not always very tractable and sometimes require
therapy. Many people, though, can make a great deal of progress by
increasing their nonjudgmental awareness of their own emotional
responses and by reading excellent books on the subject. Love Sense:
The Revolutionary New Science of Romantic Relationships by Sue
Johnson, who developed Emotionally Focused Couples Therapy,

[PDF page 137]

directly addresses attachment as it relates to sex, and there’s always my
own brief Scientiﬁc Guide to Successful Relationships. In that guide, I
discuss a skill that I call “staying over your own emotional center of
gravity,” which I deﬁne this way: “Staying over your own emotional
center of gravity . . . means owning your feelings, listening to them, and
being responsive without being reactive, taking emotions seriously
without taking them personally.”
This is in contrast to running away from your emotions or trying to shift
your emotional center of gravity onto your partner. There are some basic
rules you have to follow in order to stay over your emotional center of
gravity:
Your feelings are neither more nor less important than your partner’s. Your pain doesn’t
automatically make your experience more valid, nor does your partner’s pain make your
partner’s experience more valid. When we are in emotional pain, we tend to prioritize
easing that pain over respecting our partner’s experience, so we have to remind ourselves
that our diﬀerent experiences matter equally.
Each of you is 100 percent responsible for your own feelings. Partners in healthy
relationships choose to help each other with their feelings, but it is always a choice. We
“turn toward” our partner’s needs, as relationship researcher John Gottman puts it, and
when our partner supports us, we express our gratitude for that choice.
There are four basic steps to the process:
1. Name the Feeling. “Right now I feel . . . jealous/angry/hurt/etc.” Simple, though there
are usually multiple feelings involved at the same time. That’s normal.
2. Welcome the Feeling. Don’t run away from it, don’t judge it or shame it or get mad at it.
Sit still with it, like a welcome guest.
3. Take Responsibility for the Feeling. If you feel fear or anger, how could the perceived
threat be managed? If you feel sadness, hurt, or grief, how can you heal the loss? The
question to ask yourself as you take responsibility for your feelings is: What will help?
There won’t always be something you can actively do, apart from allowing the feeling to
discharge and complete its cycle. And remember that it’s not your partner’s fault or
obligation; their help is entirely voluntary and provides an opportunity for you to express
gratitude for the support.
4. Communicate the Feeling and the Need. At last, the easiest part. “I feel x,” you say,
“and I think what would help is y.” For example, “I feel threatened by the time you spend
with your coworker, and I could use some kind of plan that will give me reassurance.” Or,
“I still have this hurt about that time you did x, and what I need is some time to go through
that emotional tunnel so I can get to the light at the end.”

[PDF page 138]

Since writing the Scientiﬁc Guide, I’ve come to think of staying over
your emotional center of gravity as the “sleepy hedgehog” model of
emotion management. If you ﬁnd a sleepy hedgehog in the chair you
were about to sit in, you should
• give it a name
• sit peacefully with it in your lap
• ﬁgure out what it needs
• tell your partner about the need, so you can collaborate to help the hedgehog
Getting mad at the hedgehog or being afraid of it won’t help you or the
hedgehog, and you certainly can’t just shove it into your partner’s lap,
shouting, “SLEEPY HEDGEHOG! ” and expect them to deal with all its
spiky quills. It’s your hedgehog. The calmer you are when you handle it,
the less likely you are to get hurt yourself, or to hurt someone else.
Choose to Heal
A friend of mine left a bad relationship and declared (on Facebook), “I choose to hurt no
longer. [Ex-partner] can’t hurt me anymore.” The second sentence is 100 percent true and
cause for celebration. But the ﬁrst sentence doesn’t make sense from an
attachment/completing-the-cycle point of view. When you leave a bad relationship, you
have all this pent-up hurt and rage and even fear locked up inside you, which must be
allowed to discharge safely.
What makes more sense is, “I choose to allow the hurt to heal.” Healing always
involves pain—if you break your ﬁnger, it hurts, gradually less and less until it heals. Same
goes for healing emotional injury. You can’t choose for your broken heart not to hurt, any
more than you can choose for a broken bone not to hurt. But you can recognize the pain
as part of the healing, and you can trust your heart to heal, just as you trust your bones to
heal, knowing that it will gradually hurt less and less as you recover.
survival of the social
Which brings me to an additional stress response known as “tend and
befriend,” which we can think of as the marriage of stress and
attachment.30 As an ultrasocial species, our survival depends not just on
our individual ability to ﬁght, run, or shut down, but also on our ability to
collaborate with our tribe, so that we can protect them and they can
protect us. Women may be more likely than men to access this

[PDF page 139]

“aﬃliative” stress response, dealing with potential threats by connecting
aﬀectionately with people. As always, to what extent this diﬀerence is
inborn and to what extent it’s learned isn’t clear, but the diﬀerences start
early, with girls as young as eighteen months being more likely than
boys to approach, rather than avoid, a parent doing scary things.31
Where stress and attachment overlap, the message of your emotional
One Ring is, “I am lost!” and when you escape the lion and run to your
attachment object, the message is, “I am home.” If you’ve ever found
yourself checking your email obsessively when you’re stressed, or
updating Twitter, or texting your partner just to say, “hey,” or calling all
your friends one after the next, or, like Elle in Legally Blonde, running for
an emergency manicure, you may have experienced the tend and
befriend stress response. Both feeling taken care of and taking care of
others register in your stress response as “completing the cycle.”
But in modern culture, there’s a contradiction built into the social
remedies to stress. On the one hand, being around other people is often
a core part of allowing our stress response to complete, particularly for
women. On the other hand, we put the brakes on, self-inhibiting our
stress response, in order to stay socially appropriate and not make other
people uncomfortable. We hold on to our incomplete stress response in
order to access the security of being with our tribe.
And, of course, this contradiction is even more pronounced for
women, who are the culturally sanctioned “managers of relationships.”32
When the going gets tough in a heterosexual relationship, it often falls to
the woman to rein in her own stress response, in order to create space
for the man to feel his Feels. In other words, if there is stress in a
relationship, cultural rules make it likely to impact the woman more than
the man, and it’s likely to impact her sexual interest and response. And
because she has to hold on to her stress, so that her partner can let his
go, she is more likely to become stuck in her stress, while he moves
through his.
I blame Charles Dickens. Take Mrs. Cratchit from A Christmas Carol.
Her son, Tiny Tim, dies, and she tells her other children that she’s crying
because the color of her sewing hurts her eyes, and she “wouldn’t want
to show weak eyes” to her husband. When I was little, I used to think, as
Dickens wanted me to, Mrs. Cratchit is so brave. But now that I know
about the stress response cycle, I want to yell, “Lady, your child died!
It’s not ‘weak’ to cry! And your other kids deserve to know that it’s
normal to grieve!”

[PDF page 140]

Being with the tribe doesn’t replace the Feels built into completing the
cycle. We need to discharge the stress response, complete the cycle,
before our bodies can move on. “Home” is the place—physical and
emotional—where we can discharge stress without being judged or
shamed or told we just need to relax or forget about it. “Home” is where
we receive our partner’s “loving presence.” People who listen with a
loving presence are calm, attentive, and warmly attuned to the other
person. In the very best relationships, we’re allowed to experience all
forms of stress—anger, fear, shutdown—and receive the loving
presence of our partner sitting still and quiet through the storm.
Every culture has rules about how much of which kinds of emotion are
appropriate in what circumstances. But our culture has constructed a
social world where there is almost nowhere that we can connect with
others while experiencing the full range of our emotional intensity. For a
lot of us, there are times when we more readily share a loving presence
through spiritual practice or with our pets than with our partners, who
are mired in their own stress. God and your dog never judge or blame
you for having Feels—but neither of them can make love with you.
Sex is an attachment behavior. When your attachment is threatened
or when you and your partner share a stressor, sex can be a powerful,
pleasurable way to connect in the face of the “I’m lost” signals, so that
you can ﬁnd your way home. Together. But this feels pleasurable only if
you can give each other time and space for Feels.
If all of this sounds impossible in your relationship, don’t worry,
chapter 9 will help with that.
the water of life
I am at risk/I am safe.
I am broken/I am whole.
I am lost/I am home.
As you progress through these biological processes, your mental
state changes, and that, in turn, changes whether and how your brain
responds to contexts as sexually relevant or to sensations as sexually
pleasurable.
Stress hits the brake for about 80 percent of people, but it activates
the accelerator for others—people vary. But for everyone, stress

[PDF page 141]

changes the context in which you experience sexual response, which
changes your perception of sexual sensations.
The key to managing stress so that it doesn’t interfere with sexual
pleasure is learning to complete the cycle—unlock freeze, escape the
predator, conquer the enemy. Celebrate, like glitter settling in a snow
globe.
Sex is an attachment behavior, reinforcing the social bond between
adults. Sometimes it takes the form of passionate, joyful sex between
people who are falling in love with each other. Sometimes it takes the
form of desperate, grasping sex between people whose attachment is
threatened. Counterintuitively, when attachment is at its most secure
and stable—when your relationship is all satisfaction and no worry or
“plot”—it can take a backseat in your sexual arousability.
Stress and love (in the form of attachment) can be companions to sex.
Sex strengthens bonds between partners, helps each partner feel safe,
cherished, and supported in a world where we are not always safe,
where sometimes our only shield from chaos and terror is our chosen
family.
Women tell me their stories, and I keep those stories in a mental
library. One shelf in that library is overﬂowing: the one that holds
stories of sexual violence. Like all the rest, these are awe-inspiring
stories of discovery, but they are the darkest stories, revealing just
how viciously indiﬀerent the world can be to women’s sexual
autonomy.
Merritt’s is one of those. The one-sentence version: She was a
leader of the campus gay-straight alliance, out and proud, and he,
she would later learn, bet his friends that he could “turn her.”
It’s sickening, I know. I wish no one had stories like this to tell.
But it happens.
During the assault, her body went into survival mode—she
froze. And until she learned about the brakes stress response, she
hadn’t understood why she didn’t ﬁght or run or kick the guy in the
balls. She has struggled to trust her body ever since, and her body
has struggled to operate healthfully without her trust.
When a person experiences trauma, it’s like someone snuck
into the garden and ripped out all the plants she had been
cultivating with such care and attention. There is rage. There is

[PDF page 142]

grief for the garden as it was. And there is fear that it will never
grow back.
But it will grow back. That’s what gardens do.
Merritt was into the garden metaphor. She stopped me in the
street one day, phone in hand, to say, “I was thinking about the
garden, and I had to read you this thing my partner found!”
She read:
The water of life is here.
I’m drinking it. But I had to come
this long way to know it! 33
“ ‘The water of life,’ ” she enthused. “It’s this Rumi poem about a
guy who loses everything and goes on a quest and he’s like
Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz, he had the power all along. And you
know what the water of life is?”
“Tell me.” (This was nowhere near the weirdest thing anyone
had ever stopped me in the street to tell me.)
She said, “Love is the water of life!”34
I think that’s right. If women’s sexuality is a garden, I think of love as
the rain and stress as the sun, drawing the garden upward, nourishing
and challenging at once. It wouldn’t do to have too much of either, but in
the right balance, the garden thrives.
Some plants want lots of water, some want less; some gardens are
shady, while others are full of bright sun all day. Olivia, with her sensitive
accelerator, has a sunny garden full of plants that delight in the sun—
she’s practically a desert, with Joshua trees and blackfoot daisies
thriving under a hot, cloudless sky. But even for her, too much of a good
thing can cause her garden to wilt and fade. Camilla, by contrast, with
her relatively insensitive accelerator, has a montane forest of broadleaf
ferns and mosses that require less light and more time to grow lush.
Meanwhile, Merritt’s sensitive brake makes her garden wilt in the
mildest drought, and Laurie’s garden feels like it’s been subjected to
global warming, stripped of its native climate faster than she and her
plants can adapt, and she fears the whole garden is dying. And she’s
afraid that if she loses her garden, she might lose her partner.
Listening to and respecting the fundamental messages that your body
is trying to send you—“I am at risk,” “I am broken,” “I am lost”—is

[PDF page 143]

essential to creating the right context for sexual pleasure to thrive.
Allowing time and space for your body to move all the way through the
cycle, to discharge stress and to connect wholly with your partner, is an
essential part of creating a context that grants maximum access to
pleasure.
Western culture does not make this easy; it builds walls of shame and
doubt between us and our essential selves, between “at risk” and
“safe,” between “broken” and “whole,” between “lost” and “home.”
In the garden metaphor, the cultural messages about women’s
sexuality are very often the weeds, encroaching in ways no one chose
but that everyone has to manage.
And that’s what chapter 5 is about.
tl;dr
• Stress reduces sexual interest in 80–90 percent of people and reduces sexual pleasure
in everyone—even the 10–20 percent of people for whom it increases interest. The way to
deal with stress is to allow your body to complete the stress response cycle. Complete the
worksheet on this page to ﬁgure out what works for you.
• Trauma survivors’ brains sometimes learn to treat “sexually relevant” stimuli as threats,
so that whenever the accelerator is activated, the brake is hit, too. Practicing mindfulness
is an evidence-based strategy for decoupling the brakes and accelerator.
• In the right context, sex can attach us emotionally to new partners or reinforce emotional
bonds in unstable relationships. In other words, sex and love are closely linked in our
brains—but only in the right context.
• Sex that brings you closer to your partner “advances the plot,” as opposed to gratuitous
sex, for no reason other than that you can. To have more and better sex, give yourself a
compelling reason to have sex, something important to move toward.
coping with stress
My three top stressors:
1.
2.
3.

[PDF page 144]

How I can tell I’m stressed:
Physical Signs of Stress
(e.g., digestive upset,
jaw tension, etc.)
Emotional Signs of
Stress (e.g., tearful,
easily frustrated, etc.)
Cognitive Signs of
Stress (e.g., distracted,
unfocused, etc.)
When I’m feeling stressed, overwhelmed, or exhausted, here’s what
helps:
Choose one (for now) of the things you just identiﬁed and think about
what it would take to increase your access to it. Suppose you decided
you wanted to use this stress management strategy more. What are
some challenges you might face?
What are some things you might do to minimize those barriers, if you
decided to try using this stress management strategy more?
On a scale of 0–10, how IMPORTANT is it to you to increase your
access to this stress management strategy? _______
What makes it that important, rather
than a little less important?
What could potentially happen that would
make it MORE important?

[PDF page 145]

On a scale of 0–10, how CONFIDENT do you feel that, if you decided to
increase your access to this stress management strategy, you could?
What makes you that conﬁdent, rather
than a little less conﬁdent?
What could potentially happen that would
make you feel MORE conﬁdent?
Given all of that, what’s one thing you will do TODAY that can move you
just one step closer to being able to use this stress management
strategy more?

[PDF page 146]

ﬁve
cultural context
A SEX-POSITIVE LIFE IN A SEX-NEGATIVE WORLD
When Johnny and Laurie took my advice and stopped having sex,
something unexpected cracked open inside Laurie.
They cuddled and snuggled a few minutes at bedtime each
night, without the awkward are-we-going-to-have-sex-tonight
anxiety.
Into that silence one night, Laurie asked Johnny why he liked
having sex with her.
He gave such a good answer. He said, “Because you’re
beautiful.”
He didn’t say, “Because you look beautiful” or “Because you’re
my wife” or “Because sex is fun” or even “Because I love you.” He
said, “You are beautiful.” It’s a perfect thing to say—not least
because he really, really meant it.
Laurie being Laurie, she burst into tears. Until that moment, she
had not realized how much self-criticism she was carrying with her
every day, how much shame she felt about the ways her body had
changed since she had the baby, as if those changes reﬂected
some moral failing on her part—as if a truly “good person” would
never allow her body to be changed by a paltry thing like having a
baby.
She started listing all the things she felt uncomfortable with—her
droopy boobs, her squishy tummy, her cottage-cheesy thighs, the
deepening wrinkles that bracketed her mouth—a mouth that
seemed to have a permanent frown now. And Johnny started
touching each and every one of these “imperfect” body parts,
saying, “I love that, though” and “but this is beautiful.”

[PDF page 147]

At last he looked into her eyes and said, “You really don’t see it.
You really believe this stuﬀ makes you less beautiful. Honey, your
body gets sexier every day, just by being the body of the woman I
share my life with. Your belly is our belly. I’ve got one too. Do you
love me less for it?”
“Of course not.”
“Exactly, of course not.”
And of course what happened next is they had totally mind-
blowing sex—made all the more mind-blowing by the whispers of,
“We aren’t supposed to be doing this!” It turns out the pressure of
what she’s “supposed” to be doing works both ways.
When Laurie told me about this, she emphasized that
throughout the whole encounter she never felt like he was initiating
sex. It just felt like he was giving her love at a moment when she
really, really needed it.
And yes, being a sex educator is the best job ever, when people
tell you stories like this.
This chapter is about the obstacles that were standing in
Laurie’s way, without her being fully aware of them, and how she
and Johnny knocked them down.
Let’s return to the garden metaphor: You’re born with a little plot of
rich and fertile soil, unique to yourself. Your brain and body are the soil
of this garden, and individual diﬀerences in your SIS and SES are
important characteristics of your innate garden, which is made of the
same parts as everyone else’s, but organized in a unique way.
Your family and your culture plant the seeds and tend the garden, and
they teach you how to tend it. They plant the seeds of language and
attitudes and knowledge and habits about love and safety and bodies
and sex. And gradually, as you move into adolescence, you take on
responsibility for tending your own garden.
As you begin to tend the garden yourself, you may ﬁnd that your family
and your culture have planted some beautiful, nourishing things. You
may also ﬁnd that your family and culture have planted some pretty toxic
crap in your garden. And everyone—even those whose families planted
pretty good stuﬀ—will have to deal with the invasive weeds of a sex-
negative culture full of body shaming and sex stigma. These travel not in
the seeds planted by families but underground via their roots, like poison

[PDF page 148]

ivy, under fences and over walls, from garden to garden. No one chose
that they be there, but there they are nonetheless.
So if you want to have a healthy garden, a garden you choose, you
have to go row by row and ﬁgure out what you want to keep and
nurture . . . and what you want to dig out and replace with something
healthier.
It is not fair that you have to do all that extra work. After all, you didn’t
choose what got planted by your family and your culture. No one asked
for your permission before they started planting the toxic crap. They
didn’t wait until you could give consent and then say, “Would it be okay
with you if we planted the seeds of body self-criticism and sexual
shame?” Chances are, they just planted the same things that were
planted in their gardens, and it never even occurred to them to plant
something diﬀerent.
I was chatting about this one October evening, over poutine and beer,
with Canadian sex researcher Robin Milhausen, and she said this
brilliant thing: “We’re raising women to be sexually dysfunctional, with all
the ‘no’ messages we’re giving them about diseases and shame and
fear. And then as soon as they’re eighteen they’re supposed to be
sexual rock stars, multiorgasmic and totally uninhibited. It doesn’t make
any sense. None of the things we do in our society prepares women for
that.”
Exactly.
Chapter 4 was about how the context in this moment—your sense of
safety in your life and your sense of wholeness in your relationship—
aﬀects your sexual pleasure. This chapter is about the large-scale, long-
term context—the years of “no” messages—and the deep patterns of
thinking and feeling they create, patterns that are reinforced and
reiterated over decades of life. These patterns are emphatically not
innate, but they were learned early. You began these lessons long
before you were capable of thinking critically about whether you wanted
them. And just as you learned them, you can unlearn them, if you want
to, and replace them with new, healthier patterns that promote
conﬁdence, joy, satisfaction, and even ecstasy.
We’ll start with three core cultural messages about women’s sexuality
that my students grapple with as their established ideas about sex are
challenged by the science: the moral message (you are evil), the
medical message (you are diseased), and the media message (you are
inadequate). Hardly anyone fully buys in to any of these messages, but

[PDF page 149]

they are there, encroaching on our gardens, and the better we are at
seeing them for what they are, the better we’ll be at weeding them out.
Then I’ll talk about body self-criticism. This issue is so entrenched in
Western culture that most women hardly notice how ubiquitous and how
toxic is it. It’s so entrenched, in fact, that many women believe it’s
actually important and beneﬁcial. I’ll talk about the research that says
otherwise. If the only change you make after reading this book is to
reduce your body self-criticism, that alone will revolutionize your sexual
wellbeing.
Next, I’ll talk about another core emotion, like stress and attachment:
disgust. Like body self-criticism, disgust is so entrenched in the sexual
culture that it’s diﬃcult to know what our sexual wellbeing would be like
without it. But there’s growing evidence that disgust is impairing our
sexual wellbeing, much as body self-criticism does, and there are things
you can do to weed it out, if you want to.
And that’s what I’ll talk about in the last section of this chapter. I’ll
describe research-based strategies for creating positive change in both
self-criticism and disgust: self-compassion, cognitive dissonance, and
basic media literacy. The goal is to help you recognize what you’ve been
taught, deliberately or otherwise, in order to help you choose whether to
continue believing those things. You may well choose to keep a lot of
what you learned—what matters is that you choose it, instead of letting
your beliefs about your body and sex be chosen for you by the accident
of the culture and family you were born into. When you take the time to
notice your unchosen beliefs, and to say yes or no to those beliefs, you
empower yourself to have the sexual wellbeing that ﬁts you, custom
made.
three messages
Many of my students come to my class thinking that they know kind of a
lot about sex, only to discover, about halfway through the ﬁrst lecture,
that they kind of don’t.
What they do know a lot about—and they really know a lot about it—is
not sex itself but rather what their culture believes about sex. They, we,
all of us, are surrounded by messages about these beliefs, messages
that are not only short on facts but are also actively self-contradictory.

[PDF page 150]

I was puzzled by the false beliefs my students brought with them into
the classroom, until I began reading antique sex advice manuals. And
there they were in black and white, written a hundred years ago or more
—the same false ideas my students believed. Students have absorbed
these ideas from their families and their cultures, without any of them
ever having read those books.
One day in class, I read aloud a couple of deﬁnitions of “sex.” First I
read from Ideal Marriage: Its Physiology and Technique by T. H. van de
Velde, from 1926. He wrote that “normal sexual intercourse” is
that intercourse which takes place between two sexually mature individuals of opposite
sexes; which excludes cruelty and the use of artiﬁcial means for producing voluptuous
sensations; which aims directly or indirectly at the consummation of sexual satisfaction,
and which, having achieved a certain degree of stimulation, concludes with the ejaculation
—or emission—of the semen into the vagina, at the nearly simultaneous culmination of
sensation—or orgasm—of both partners.1
Then I read from The Hite Report, published in 1976, from the
chapter titled “Redeﬁning Sex”:
Sex is intimate physical contact for pleasure, to share pleasure with another person (or
just alone). You can have sex to orgasm, or not to orgasm, genital sex, or just physical
intimacy—whatever seems right to you. There is never any reason to think the “goal” must
be intercourse, and to try to make what you feel ﬁt into that context. There is no standard
of sexual performance “out there,” against which you must measure yourself; you aren’t
ruled by “hormones” or “biology.” You are free to explore and discover your own sexuality,
to learn or unlearn anything you want, and to make physical relations with other people, of
either sex, anything you like.2
And I asked my students, “Which of these is more like what you
learned growing up?”
No contest. Ideal Marriage.
Many of us have absorbed ideas about sex that are at home in a
century-old sex manual, even though all the research and political
change since then has busily dismantled every single aspect of those
old ideas. Somehow the culture has not absorbed the more inclusive
and evidence-based ideas of more recent decades.
The outdated ideas consist of three interwoven cultural messages of
sexual socialization that women encounter in modern America. I call
them the Moral Message, the Medical Message, and the Media

[PDF page 151]

Message—sent by three separate but intertwined messengers. To
varying degrees, each has pieces of truth and wisdom to oﬀer, and to
varying degrees each has a self-interested agenda. We’ve all absorbed
at least a little of all of them, and they shape the story we tell about our
own and others’ sexualities.
The Moral Message: “You are Damaged Goods.” If you want or like
sex, you’re a slut. Your virginity is your most valuable asset. If you’ve
had too many partners (“too many” = more than your male partner has
had), you should be ashamed. There is only one right way to behave
and one right way to feel about sex—not to feel anything about it at all
but to accommodate the man to whom your body belongs. Sex is not
part of what makes a woman lovable; it can only be part of what makes
a woman unlovable. It may make her “desirable”—and many women try
to be desirable, but only as a lesser alternative to being lovable. If you
are sexually desirable, you are, by deﬁnition, unlovable.
And a slut.
This is the oldest message, having changed only superﬁcially in the
last three hundred years. There are almost too many examples to
choose just one, but let’s take a paragraph of rhetorical questions from
James Fordyce’s Sermons to Young Women, published in 1766 and
read aloud by Mr. Collins to the ladies in Jane Austen’s novel Pride and
Prejudice. The overall message of the Sermons is “women are
appealing when they’re meek and ignorant and pure.” In this section,
Fordyce is discussing “public diversions” involving “oaths, imprecations,
double meaning, everything obscene” (he means going to the theater):
Between the state of virgin purity and actual prostitution are there no intermediate
degrees? Is it nothing to have the soul deﬂowered, the fancy polluted, the passions ﬂung
into a ferment? . . . Such indeed one would think were the opinion of those, who imagine
there can be no harm in a passion for places of entertainment . . .
Translation: If you enjoy being entertained, you will lose your mental
virginity, which makes you the same as a prostitute. Which would, it
goes without saying, make you unlovable.
And a slut.
Jane Austen knew it was bogus. You know it’s bogus. But it’s there in
the culture you were raised in, and it sneaks under the fence and
invades like poison ivy.
The Medical Message: “You Are Diseased.” Sex can cause disease
and pregnancy, which makes it dangerous. But if you’re ready to take

[PDF page 152]

that risk, sexual functioning should happen in a particular order—desire,
then arousal, then orgasm during intercourse simultaneously with your
partner—and when it doesn’t, there is a medical issue that you must
address. Medically. Women’s sexual response is biologically analogous
to men’s, though most women want sex less than men and take longer
to achieve orgasm. To the extent that a woman’s sexual response diﬀers
from a man’s, she is diseased. Except for pregnancy, which is what sex
is for. One woman even told me that her (male) doctor said her low
sexual desire was caused by her body shutting down her sex drive in
order to prevent her from getting pregnant. She asked me if that’s true.
Short answer: No. Long answer: Hell no, and I hope that doctor reads
chapter 7.
This is a newer message, dating from about the middle of the
nineteenth century or later. As an example, Marie Stopes’s 1918
classic, Married Love, has this to say on the subject of intercourse:
Where the [man and woman] are perfectly adjusted, the woman simultaneously reaches
the crisis of nervous reactions and muscular convulsions similar to his. This mutual
orgasm is extremely important . . . and it is a mutual, not a selﬁsh, pleasure, more
calculated than anything else to draw out an unspeakable tenderness and understanding
in both partakers of this sacrament.
Simultaneous orgasm can be very nice. But you know as well as I do
that it is not the marker of a “perfectly adjusted” sexual experience. And
yet, nearly one hundred years later, the idea of simultaneous orgasm
during intercourse persists as a bogus cultural marker of “sexual
excellence.”
The Media Message: “You Are Inadequate.” Spanking, food play,
ménages à trois . . . you’ve done all these things, right? Well, you’ve at
least had clitoral orgasms, vaginal orgasms, uterine orgasms, energy
orgasms, extended orgasms, and multiple orgasms? And you’ve
mastered at least thirty-ﬁve diﬀerent positions for intercourse? If you
don’t try all these things, you’re frigid. If you’ve had too few partners,
don’t watch porn, and don’t have a collection of vibrators in your
bedside table, you’re a prude. Also: You’re too fat and too thin; your
breasts are too big and too small. Your body is wrong. If you’re not trying
to change it, you’re lazy. If you’re satisﬁed with yourself as you are,
you’re settling. And if you dare to actively like yourself, you’re a
conceited bitch. In short, you are doing it wrong. Do it diﬀerently. No,
that’s wrong too, try something else. Forever.

[PDF page 153]

This is the newest message, following close on the heels of television
and the birth control pill, around the middle of the twentieth century. To
see an example, just look at the checkout counter of any drugstore,
where magazine racks announce in bright sans serif fonts all the
exciting things you could (and, it goes without saying, should ) be doing
in bed. In the month that I’m writing this, the covers of various women’s
magazines announce “Break the Bed Sex: 21 New Ideas to Blow Your
Own Damn Mind” (Cosmopolitan), “The First Time He Sleeps With
You: Four Confessions That Shocked Us” (Glamour), and “Total Body
Sex: Follow This Road Map to a Longer, Stronger Big-O!” (Women’s
Health).
You know it’s just for fun. You’re not really trying to live up to the
standard set by characters on a TV show. But it’s there, aﬀecting your
garden, whether you welcome it there or not.
Camilla had said, “The images we see—or don’t see—matter.
They tell us what’s possible.”
And it’s just as true for the stories we tell as it is about the
images of the people in the stories.
Camilla had spent a lot of her early adolescence reading old
romance novels from the 1970s and ’80s. These stories stuck with
her so powerfully that she even wrote her undergrad thesis on
gender and race politics in ephemeral art.
But now, having ﬁgured out context and the dual control model,
she revisited a collection of romance novels, examining the
contexts that the narratives created for the women’s sexualities.
And those contexts were bizarre.
She told Henry and me, “So here’s the universal story: The
heroine is a Good Girl, who has no accelerator and a sensitive
brake, who has never had the slightest sexual feeling until she
meets the Hero. You can tell he’s the Hero because suddenly
Good Girl’s accelerator is going bananas. But Good Girl has to
keep the brakes on because sex is inherently bad and dangerous,
and so of course the Hero just has sex with her anyway—”
Henry raised an eyebrow and shook his head at this. I face-
palmed.
“But gradually the purity and goodness of her squeaky-clean
vagina ‘tames’ the Hero and they fall in love and get married.”

[PDF page 154]

This is both hilarious and tragic, because it is so not how
women’s sexuality actually works.
But here was the next-level insight:
She said, “So what I’m thinking is . . . what if the way women’s
sexual desire and emotions and relationships are represented in
the media is just as distorted as the way women’s bodies are
represented? What if everything about how sex works is just as
poorly drawn as the Escher Girls? What if basically everything
culture says about sex is wrong, and my slow-to-heat accelerator
is actually just completely normal?”
And of course it is. She’s made of all the same parts as
everyone else, organized in a unique way.
you are beautiful
On the day you were born, how did you feel about the chub of fat on the
back of your thighs?
How did the adults around you feel about it?
Every baby needs her caregivers to hold her in their arms with
aﬀection and joy, and most of the time in the Western world, those
caregivers are bursting with eagerness to meet that need. On the day
we’re born, most of us are celebrated and called beautiful.
But something happens between that joyful day when every inch,
every ounce, every roll, and every bump of a girl’s body is celebrated as
perfect and lovable precisely as it is . . . and the day she hits puberty.
What happens is she absorbs messages about what is or is not
lovable about her body. The seeds of body self-criticism are planted and
nurtured, and body self-conﬁdence and self-compassion are neglected,
punished, and weeded out.
Students laugh like I made a joke when I ask, “What would happen if
you met your friends at dinner and said, ‘I feel so beautiful today!’?”
“Really, what would happen?” I insist.
“No one would do that,” they tell me.
“But . . . how often would someone meet friends at dinner and say, ‘I
feel so fat today’?”
“All the time,” they say.
All the time.3

[PDF page 155]

Women have cultural permission to criticize ourselves, but we are
punished if we praise ourselves, if we dare to say that we like ourselves
the way we are.4
And it’s messing with our orgasms, our pleasure, our desire, and our
sexual satisfaction. There is a direct trade-oﬀ between sexual wellbeing
and self-critical thoughts about your body. A 2012 review of ﬁfty-seven
studies, spanning two decades of research, found important links
between body image and just about every domain of sexual behavior
you can imagine: arousal, desire, orgasm, frequency of sex, number of
partners, sexual self-assertiveness, sexual self-esteem, using alcohol or
other drugs during sex, engaging in unprotected sex, and more.5 Theresults vary somewhat among diﬀerent age groups, among women of
diﬀerent sexual identities, and across diﬀerent racial groups, but the
overall result is universal: Women who feel worse about their bodies
have less satisfying, riskier sex, with less pleasure, more unwanted
consequences, and more pain.6
I don’t think anyone will be surprised to hear that feeling good about
your body improves your sex life. It’s obvious once you think about it,
right? Just think about having sex if you feel insecure and unattractive.
How would it feel to have a person you care about touching you and
looking at you, when the thought of your own body makes you
uncomfortable? Would you pay attention to the sensations in your body
and your partner’s—or would you pay attention to all the things you feel
compelled to hide?
And does that activate the sexual accelerator, or does it hit the brake?
Now imagine having sex when you feel tremendously conﬁdent and
beautiful. Imagine a person you care about touching your skin with their
hands and their gaze, when you love every inch of yourself and can feel
your partner appreciating how gorgeous you are.
The eagerness mechanism is fully on board in both cases—but in the
ﬁrst case the mechanism is torn between moving toward the sexual
experience and moving away from your own body. In the second, when
you enjoy living inside your own skin, the mechanism moves toward sex
and toward yourself, without conﬂict.
So of course body self-criticism interferes with sexual wellbeing. We
can’t understand women’s sexual satisfaction without thinking about
body satisfaction, just as we can’t understand women’s sexual pleasure
without thinking about attachment and stress. And women will not be

[PDF page 156]

fully, blissfully satisﬁed with their sex lives until they are fully, blissfully
satisﬁed with their own bodies.
So, to have more and better sex, love your body.
Which is one of those things where you’re like, “Yeah! . . . But . . .
how?”
It’s hard, because you never chose not to love your body. You didn’t
choose much that happened to you between the day you were born and
the day you hit puberty, and that’s when most of the body self-criticism
was taking root. You never even got a chance to say yes or no to the
self-criticism being planted in your garden.
What it comes down to is that a lot of women trust their bodies less
than they trust what they’ve been taught, culturally, about their bodies.
But culture has taught you stuﬀ that is both incorrect and just wrong.
Hurtful. I want to address two things you’ve been taught that are
deﬁnitely wrong, and what’s right: ﬁrst, that self-criticism is good for you
and second that fat is bad for you. These things are both false. Here’s
why:
criticizing yourself = stress = reduced sexual pleasure
Women have been trained to beat ourselves up when we fall short. We
criticize ourselves—“I’m so stupid/fat/crazy,” “I suck,” “I’m a loser”—as
a reﬂex when things don’t go the way we want them to. And our brains
process self-criticism with brain areas linked to behavioral inhibition—
brakes.7 So it’s not surprising that self-criticism is directly related to
depression8—and does depression improve your sexual well-being? Itdoes not.
Here’s how that works:
When you get right down to it, self-criticism is yet another form of
stress.9 I described stress in chapter 4 as an evolutionarily adaptive
mechanism to help us escape threats—“I am at risk.” When we think, “I
am an inadequate person!” that’s like saying, “I am the lion!” Literally,
our stress hormone levels increase.10 Your body reacts to negative self-
evaluations as if you’re under attack.
The solution is to practice replacing self-criticism with self-kindness.
Women tend to have a two-layered response to this idea. First, they
instinctively love the idea of being more accepting of themselves and not
blaming themselves when life isn’t perfect. The research tells women

[PDF page 157]

what they already know intuitively: Self-criticism is associated with
worse health outcomes, both mental and physical, and more
loneliness.11 That’s right: Self-criticism is one of the best predictors of
loneliness—so it’s not just “I am at risk,” it’s also “I am lost.”
But then, when women start to think concretely about it, they begin to
discover a sense that they need their self-criticism in order to stay
motivated. We believe it does us good to torture ourselves, at least a
little bit. As in: “If I stop beating myself up for the ways I’m not perfect,
that’s like admitting to the world—and to myself—that I’ll never be
perfect, that I’m permanently inadequate! I need my self-criticism in
order to maintain hope and to motivate myself to get better.”
When we tell ourselves, “I can’t stop criticizing myself or else I will fail
forever!” that’s like saying, “I can’t stop running/ﬁghting/playing dead, or
the lion will eat me!” That’s absolutely what our culture has taught us, so
it makes sense that many of us believe it. It’s so entrenched in our
culture that it sounds . . . sane. Rational, even.
But it’s not.
Think about it: What would really happen if you stopped running from
yourself or beating yourself up? What would happen if you put down the
whip you’ve been ﬂogging yourself with for decades?
When you stop beating yourself up—when you stop reinjuring yourself
—what happens is . . . you start to heal.
Self-criticism is an invasive weed in the garden, but too many of us
have been taught to treat it like a treasured ﬂower, even as it strangles
the native plants of our sexuality. Far from motivating us to get better,
self-criticism makes us sicker.
Later in the chapter, I’ll describe three evidence-based ways for
changing patterns of self-criticism, but for right now let me just point out
that you can’t stop criticizing yourself by beating yourself up when you
criticize yourself. If you notice yourself thinking, “Ugh, I suck,” and then
think, “Darn it all, Emily told me to stop doing that! I suck!” that’s not
really helping, right? So when you notice yourself thinking, “Ugh, I
suck,” or whatever it is you say to yourself when things don’t go your
way, just notice that. Just notice that it’s a weed. You didn’t put it there
—it snuck under the fence. And take that opportunity to plant a seed of
something positive. For example, when you think, “Ugh, I suck,” plant
the thought, “I’m okay.” As in, “I’m safe,” “I’m whole,” or “I’m home.”
You’re okay.
And change happens—it happens all the time!

[PDF page 158]

Let me tell you about my friend Ruth. We were sitting together one
afternoon, talking about sex (an inevitable topic, if you talk to me long
enough), and she told me, “You know, I’ve been through a lot of things,
but my sexuality has really opened up and been so much better lately.”
“Awesome!” I said. “What changed?”
“I just feel a lot more conﬁdent in myself, in my body! I know now that
I’m amazing to be with and I can revel in that.”
“That’s awesome! How did you make it happen?”
She said, “It’s like one day I just decided that it was all bullshit. Who
are they to tell me I’m not amazing exactly as I am?”
Yep. That.
health at every size
Weight is just one of several things people (especially women) criticize
themselves for, but it may be the most universal, with half of girls as
young as three years old worrying that they might be “fat”12—and it’s
certainly among the most dangerous and needless.
People want to lose weight for two reasons: health and beauty.
Whether you can measure beauty on a scale, I don’t know,13 but I doknow you deﬁnitely can’t measure health that way, and I’m determined
to bust that myth right now, once and for all.
Here’s the myth as plainly as I can state it: If I know how much you
weigh, I also know something about your health.
And that’s wrong. The fact is, weight alone tells us almost nothing
about health. The research is painfully clear, though plenty of people
have a hard time accepting it—there’s been controversy about this
research in the mainstream media, and even among academics,
because it runs so contrary to what we’ve all been told, and it somehow
feels dangerous to give people permission not to hate their bodies
(despite the fact that the research I described in the previous section
proves that people are healthier when they don’t hate themselves). But if
you think about it logically for two seconds, you’ll see how obviously true
it is that weight is nothing more than a measure of gravity. Look:
• Want to lose ten pounds without diet or exercise? Cut oﬀ your leg at the knee! I
guarantee, the next time you step on a scale, you’ll weigh less.

[PDF page 159]

• Or, hey, want to lose ﬁve pounds of fat? Have your brain removed—its mass is almost
100 percent fat!
• You know who’s always thin? People who’ve been living in a prison camp!
• Quick and easy weight loss! Fly in a plane! Better yet, go into space! They don’t call it
“weightless” for nothing!
If that sounds glib, good. I think it’s stupid and destructive that
“experts” have been telling us that we can measure our health by
measuring something we can change by removing a limb, torturing
ourselves, or going on a plane and measuring it up there instead. You
can achieve your medically deﬁned “ideal weight” without improving
your health at all; it might even substantially impair your health!
In case that’s not compelling enough and you’d like a medical opinion,
let me tell you this story. One evening during the conference where I
learned about Health at Every Size (HAES), I actually went on a date
with a cardiologist. I told him about the conference and asked him about
this speciﬁc statistic that a speaker mentioned.
I said, “Dr. Date, is it true that it can be healthier to be seventy-ﬁve
pounds over your medically deﬁned ‘ideal weight’ than to be ﬁve pounds
under it?”
And Dr. Date said, “I don’t know if I’d use those precise numbers, but
that’s the right idea. For diﬀerent reasons, being just slightly underweight
carries greater risk than being obese.”
The date wasn’t very successful, and two years later I married a
cartoonist and his two cats, but Dr. Date and I had a nice dinner and he
veriﬁed that weight is not what matters, healthy behaviors are what
matter.
My friend and personal trainer, Kelly Coﬀey, weighed more than three
hundred pounds when she graduated from Smith College. She was
completely miserable and thought her weight was to blame. So she had
bariatric surgery and lost half her body weight.
And she says, “I felt happy for a few weeks, and then the depression,
the self-hate, all of it came ﬂooding back.”
So when did things change for her?
“When I realized it wasn’t about weight,” she says. “It was about
learning to respect myself and my body and treat it with love.”
It’s not about weight or size or fat—weight is a measure of gravity and
nothing else—it’s about living joyfully inside your body, as it is, today.
Which brings me to Health at Every Size. HAES is, as the name
implies, an approach to living inside your body based on health rather

[PDF page 160]

than weight. Linda Bacon literally wrote the book on HAES—Health at
Every Size: The Surprising Truth about Your Weight—based on her
decades of research on nutrition, exercise, and health. There are four
major tenets, according to “The HAES Manifesto”: (1) accept your size,
(2) trust yourself, (3) adopt healthy lifestyle habits including joyful
physical activity and nutritious foods, and (4) embrace size diversity.14
It’s almost too simple: Welcome your body just as it is, listen to your
own internal needs, and make healthful choices around food and
physical activity. You might lose weight (you probably won’t), but you’ll
deﬁnitely be healthier and happier.
Can it be true? Happy and healthy without losing weight?
It can.
Do you want it to be true?
That’s another story.
What it comes down to is whether you’re willing to try on the
possibility that you are already beautiful and whether you’re ready to
prioritize real health over conforming to some cultural standard of how
your body is “supposed” to look.
I know that intellectual awareness of the negative impact of self-
criticism and about the lack of relationship between health and weight
can’t instantly undo the decades of shaming that so many women have
absorbed. In my experience, women are reluctant to let go of their self-
critical thoughts and the cultural thin ideal even when they believe that
it’s all nonsense—which it is—and they’re even more hesitant to believe
that they are beautiful just as they are—which they are.
Later in the chapter I’ll describe three evidence-based strategies for
shifting from self-critical ways to live in your body, to compassionate and
healthful ways to live in it. But in the end, it will come down to a decision
to stop cultivating the weeds of self-criticism and instead nourish the
ﬂowers of conﬁdence today—and then remaking that decision each day.
“dirty”
I keep a basket of single-use bubble packs of lubricant in my oﬃce.
They’re all diﬀerent colors, so it looks a little like a basket of candies or
lip glosses. Coming to my oﬃce for the ﬁrst time, a student will poke her
ﬁnger into the basket, drawn by the colors, and ask, “What’s this?”
“Diﬀerent kinds of lube,” I say. “Feel free to take as many as you like.”

[PDF page 161]

About half the students say, “Cool!” and rummage around for a few
they like. And the other half yank their hand away like the basket is
suddenly ﬁlled with snakes.
That’s sexual disgust. It’s a learned withdrawal response from things
that are “gross.” Everyone has something that grosses her out sexually,
and everyone’s yucks are diﬀerent. And nobody ever needs to use
packaged lube (though I recommend it; you’ll see why in chapter 6)—we
got along just ﬁne without it for a few hundred millennia—so it may not
matter much if lube is on your list of yucks.
But what happens when that same sexual disgust is activated by
one’s own body?
“My partner wants to . . .”
I have a lot of conversations that begin this way, trailing oﬀ into
embarrassed silence. In one particular case, the student continued, “. . .
He wants to give me oral sex,” and then she turned bright red.
“Okay,” I said. And I waited.
So she said, “Well . . . I mean . . .” and she trailed oﬀ again, not
making eye contact.
“Would you like him to give you oral sex?” I prompted.
“I . . .” she said, wincing.
“I mean . . .” she went on.
“Isn’t it . . .” she ﬁnally asked, “dirty? Down there? The hair? The . . .
mucus . . . ?”
My instinctive response to a question like that is, “Of course not, it’s
beautiful down there! Congratulations on having a partner who
appreciates that fact!” And sometimes that is eﬀective. But often there’s
a huge resistant knot of beliefs that has to be untangled before the
person can get there.
Fortunately, science has provided me with a knife speciﬁcally
designed to slice through that particular knot: Moral Foundations
Theory. Jonathan Haidt and his team have found that there are six
“moral foundations” in the human brain, each of which is a solution to a
particular evolutionary problem our species has faced.15 Of the six, it’s
the “sanctity/degradation” moral foundation I ﬁnd most relevant to sex.
The sanctity foundation is about contaminant avoidance, and it’s
powered by disgust. Humans have generalized from avoidance of
physical contaminants (we’re innately grossed out by rotting corpses) to
avoidance of conceptual contaminants (we can feel grossed out just by
the words “rotting corpses”). You can visualize sanctity as a vertical

[PDF page 162]

axis, with stigmatized and taboo behaviors described as “low” and
“dirty,” and socially sanctioned behaviors as “high” and “pure.”
We judge as wrong anything associated with lowness.
In the Judeo-Christian ethic, bodies are low and spirit is high, animal
instincts are low and human reason is high, and very often women are
low and men are high. Sex draws attention downward to the base, the
animal, the contemptible, and it therefore triggers the disgust response.
This isn’t true in all cultures or belief systems—quite the opposite.16
And even notoriously “sex-negative” Christian traditions may view sex
as sacred under certain, “sanctioned” conditions. A religious
fundamentalist friend in grad school surprised me after she was married
with her eagerness to learn about pleasure and exploration, so that she
could share it with her husband. She had to learn to think diﬀerently
about her body in this new context, but once she had made the shift, her
entire experience was revolutionized.
In the right context, sex and bodies are not “low” or “degrading,” they
can be sanctiﬁed and glorious.
But many of us were raised in cultures that say our own sexual bodies
are disgusting and degrading, and so are the ﬂuids, sounds, and smells
those bodies make, as are a wide array of the things we might do with
our own bodies and our partner’s. “Avoid sex! Sex is gross, as well as
dangerous!”
If a sexual behavior or a part of your body is considered “low,” do you
suppose that activates the accelerator?
Nope. Disgust hits the brakes.
Disgust is physiologically distinct from the stress response; it’s more
akin to parasympathetic “freeze” than sympathetic “ﬁght or ﬂight.”
Disgust hits the brakes in the emotional One Ring, it slows your heart
rate, stops your gut, and closes your throat. It doesn’t matter whether it’s
activated by the stink of skunk or the stink of hypocrisy, the sight of
blood or the sight of cruelty, the physiology is basically the same.17
As Merritt thought more about her brakes and her lack of trust in
her own body, she came to this conclusion: “I want to learn to trust
my body.”
This became clear as she and Carol sat together, talking about
what and how to teach their teenage daughter about sex. They
made a list of all the things they wanted her to believe and
experience, including

[PDF page 163]

• Recognize her own beauty of body and spirit
• Feel fully in control of who touches her body, and how, and
when
• Know how to protect herself against consequences like
infections and pregnancy
When Carol (she of the feminist consciousness-raising group in
the ’80s) asked, “How about pleasure? I’d love her to know how to
give herself pleasure and to enjoy her body,” that was a tough one
for Merritt. It’s not that she didn’t want that, it’s just she . . .
couldn’t . . . quite . . .
Rare is the American parent who feels comfortable talking to a
kid about sexual pleasure—rare but not nonexistent. My favorite
story of a sex-positive parent came from a guy who told me that
the ﬁrst time he ejaculated (by rubbing his pelvis against his
mattress), he ran to his mom, terriﬁed that he had broken
something. “Mom! Mom! All this white stuﬀ came out of my penis
while I was rubbing it!” And the mom was amazing. She calmly
explained what had happened, that it was normal, and how to deal
with it in the future.
When I told that story to Merritt and Carol, Carol laughed and
said, “I love that mom!” but Merritt turned pale.
“If I had been that boy,” she said, “I’d have burned my sheets
before I would have told my mother.”
Merritt, remember, didn’t grow up in a sex-positive environment.
But in America, each generation is rapidly overturning old ideas
about social control and sex. She is the ﬁrst in her family to go to
college, and only the second generation to make a living doing
something other than farming. And along with the social and
economic revolution she represents, she’s also the ﬁrst out lesbian
—and she’s the ﬁrst in her family to argue with her spouse about
how to teach their kid about sexual pleasure.
“My parents taught me a lot of valuable things about
commitment and loyalty and being a kind and loving person,” she
said. “But they also told me that if I had sex outside marriage I’d
go to hell, and even now, after almost twenty years of Carol
coming home with me for Christmas, they still can’t look her in the
eye.”

[PDF page 164]

“It sounds like they didn’t mean to teach you shame, but that’s
what you learned,” I said.
“And when you came out,” Carol said, “you were attacked.”
“So no wonder you don’t feel like you can fully trust your own
body,” I said.
Merritt closed her eyes and shook her head. “I’d never want
Julia to feel like there was anything wrong with any part of her
body. I am not being a role model for her.”
And so, of course, she proceeded to change her entire
relationship with her body and to trust herself—to relax into
pleasure and swim in the water of life. I’ll describe how in chapter
8.
when somebody “yucks” your “yum”
Disgust can function as a social emotion—that is, we learn about what
aspects of the world (including our own bodies) are disgusting by
reading the responses of the people around us. For example, infants will
avoid a toy that their adult caregiver looks at with an expression of
disgust.18
Predictably, the experience of disgust is context sensitive—we’re less
grossed out by sex-related things while we are sexually aroused.19 Andwomen tend to be more sensitive than men to learned disgust,
particularly in the sexual domain,20 though it’s not yet clear why.21
We can see how the process of learning disgust can unfold, moment
by moment, in a person’s life if we imagine, for argument’s sake, a pair
of identical twin girls separated at birth. Let’s call them Jessica and
Theresa.
Imagine that both Jessica and Theresa, when they’re maybe ﬁve or
six years old, have a habit of masturbating in their rooms at naptime. (If
you noticed a disgust-withdrawal response in yourself at the idea of a
young girl masturbating, you’ve just experienced what I’m about to
describe!)
So one day, Jessica is masturbating in her room at naptime, when her
adult caregiver walks in and sees her with her hand down her pants.
The parent recoils in an involuntary disgust response, and says, “Stop
that!”

[PDF page 165]

On that same day, in a diﬀerent home, Theresa is also masturbating,
and her adult caregiver also walks in and sees her with her hand down
her pants. But that parent says calmly, “We’re leaving for your aunt’s
house in a few minutes. Get your shoes on.”
Jessica’s brain learns to associate the shame and distress (brakes)
communicated by her parent with whatever sexual arousal (accelerator)
she was feeling at the moment her parent scolded her.
Theresa’s brain, by contrast, learns no such association. She was
interrupted but not shut down—her accelerator deactivated, but without
necessarily hitting the brake.
This one incident may not have any lasting impact. If there are no
other incidents to reinforce this one, the association in Jessica’s brain
will be decoupled.
Now twenty years have passed, and Jessica and Theresa’s life
experiences have routinely reinforced these patterns. Jessica’s brain
has learned to associate sexual arousal with stress, shame, disgust, and
guilt. Theresa’s has learned to associate sexual arousal with pleasure,
conﬁdence, joy, and satisfaction.
Which of them has a better sex life?
Jessica will feel conﬂicted about her sexual sensations—they’re
pleasurable . . . and they’re not, at the same time. And she won’t have a
clear idea why she feels guilty, ashamed, depressed, or even physical
pain when she’s sexually aroused.
If a girl has a particularly sensitive brake system, one incident might
be enough to create a tangled knot in her arousal process. For many
women, though, it takes consistent reinforcement of a negative message
in order for it to be embedded in sexual response, and consistent
reinforcement takes a sex-negative culture.
In other words, it happens all the time.
Often disgust is reinforced in subtle ways, but sometimes we can
remember a speciﬁc moment when the message is made clear. I talked
to a grandmother—a badass Southern belle sex educator grandmother,
to be speciﬁc—who told me about just such a moment from when she
was a teenager. She had been sitting on the front porch making out with
her boyfriend, but when she went inside, her mother came up to her with
disgust in every line of her face and said, “What you were just doing out
there? That’s sex!”
And this sixty-something grandmother told me, “It took me a long,
long time to realize why I got so anxious about sex with my husband—

[PDF page 166]

and I mean nauseated anxious—and when I ﬁnally ﬁgured it out, I was
angry for about ten seconds, and then I was just so sad for my mother.”
She went on, “Now when I do health education at my church, I just
say it right out loud: ‘I like sex!’ I want everyone to know that it’s okay!”
I love this woman.
For sex educators, the rule is, “Don’t yuck anybody’s yum.” And since
we can’t know what everybody else’s yums are, we don’t yuck anything.
We know that disgust is a social emotion and that our students have
already been exposed to too many people who communicate disgust
around sex.
That’s why sex educators and sex therapists go through an
educational process of intensive exposure, deliberately designed to
minimize our own judgment, shame, and disgust reactions, so that we
can respond with open neutrality to whatever students or clients bring
into the room. This training often takes the form of a Sexual Attitude
Reassessment, a multiday training that includes values clariﬁcation
exercises, guest panels and speakers, plus (in my experience) a range
of porn that would surprise most people in its variety, intensity, and
creativity, followed by reﬂection and processing of our reactions to all of
it.
Unless you become a sex educator, you never need to go through a
process like this. All you ever need to do is begin to recognize where
your learned disgust response is interfering with your own sexual
pleasure, and decide whether it’s something you’d rather let go of. Your
genitals and your partners’, your genital ﬂuids and your partners’, your
skin and sweat and the fragrances of your body, these are all healthy
and beautiful—not to mention normal—elements of human sexual
experience. You get to choose whether you feel grossed out by them.
The research tells us that disgust, as a learned response to sex,
impairs women’s sexual functioning and is especially associated with
sexual pain disorders.22
In the next section, I’ll describe three strategies for making your own
choices about what is or isn’t disgusting—they’re the same strategies
you use to make your own choices about self-criticism. But the ﬁrst step
is to begin to notice when you experience an involuntary withdrawal from
sex-related things, and try on the possibility that the sight, the smells,
the sounds, the stickiness of your own sexual organism are glorious and
beautiful parts of being a human being.

[PDF page 167]

Because what if all of that actually is beautiful and glorious? What if
your body is cause for celebration?
(P.S. It totally is.)
•  •  •
Let’s get practical. Sex-negative culture has trained us to be self-critical
and judgmental about our bodies and our sexualities, and it’s interfering
with our sexual wellbeing. So how do we create a bubble of sex
positivity for ourselves, where we can explore and celebrate and
maximize our own sexual potential? How do we maximize the yum, in a
world that tries to convince us we’re yucky? I’ve found persuasive
evidence that the following three strategies can genuinely create positive
change.
maximizing yum . . . with science! part 1: self-compassion
Sometimes we cling to our self-criticism. We think to ourselves: “If I stop
beating myself up, I’ll get complacent and lazy, and then I’ll never
change!”
And then we cling to our self-judgments even more tightly—after all,
these are moral issues, involving whether you are a good, decent,
worthy person or a bad, disgusting, worthless person. We think: “To
accept myself as I am would be to accept that I am a ﬂawed, bad,
broken person, and to abandon all hope that I could one day be better,
that I could one day deserve love.”
Remember that beating yourself up is the emotional One Ring
equivalent of treating yourself as your own internal lion, experiencing
yourself as a threat that needs to be escaped (which is impossible),
conquered (which is literally self-destructive), or avoided through
shutdown (which is counterproductive, to say the least).
And that’s why we need self-compassion.
Self-compassion is the opposite of self-criticism and self-judgment. In
her book Self-Compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave
Insecurity Behind, researcher and educator Kristin Neﬀ describes self-
compassion’s three key elements:
•  Self-kindness is our ability to treat ourselves gently and with caring. On the Self
Compassion Scale (SCS), a survey used to assess self-compassion, self-kindness is
described with items like “When I’m going through a very hard time, I give myself the

[PDF page 168]

caring and tenderness I need.” In contrast, its opposite, self-judgment, is assessed with
“I’m intolerant and impatient towards those aspects of my personality I don’t like.”
• Common humanity is viewing our suﬀering as something that connects us with others,
rather than separates us. It’s assessed on the SCS with items like “When I feel
inadequate in some way, I try to remind myself that feelings of inadequacy are shared by
most people.” Its opposite, isolation, is assessed with “When I fail at something that’s
important to me, I tend to feel alone in my failure.”
•  Mindfulness is being nonjudgmental about whatever is happening in the present
moment. I talked about mindfulness in chapter 4, and I’ll be talking about it again in
chapter 9. Mindfulness is important. On the SCS it’s assessed with items like “When
something painful happens I try to take a balanced view of the situation.” Its opposite is
over-identiﬁcation, as in over-identifying with your own failures and suﬀering, holding fast
to the pain and being unable to let it go. It’s assessed with items like “When I’m feeling
down I tend to obsess and ﬁxate on everything that’s wrong.”
Self-judgment, isolation, and over-identiﬁcation turn you into your own
lion, being your own threat—“I am at risk.” And they’re normal—we all
experience them. Self-compassion doesn’t mean never feeling them, it
means being kind to yourself when you do.
I like to visualize the lion of body self-criticism as a sweet little kitten
that’s been treated badly and needs me to give it aﬀection and
tenderness. That’s what helps me to forgive my culture for teaching me
such bullshit. A woman I know prefers to imagine it as an enemy, and
she visualizes herself beating the crap out of it. She ﬁnds her way to
forgiveness of her culture (and of herself, for having believed her
culture) through a sense of conquering the enemy. Whatever works!
Both of us complete the stress response cycle with physical activity,
aﬀection, a good cry, self-care, or any other strategy that deals with the
stress itself, as I described in chapter 4. We let our bodies know we
have successfully escaped the lion—“I am safe. I am whole. I am
home.”
Self-compassion is emphatically not self-esteem. Self-esteem is
about self-evaluation, your perceived value as a human being, which is
often contingent upon your sense of personal success in comparison
with others. Self-compassion, by contrast, is unconditional and
nonevaluative. We can have self-compassion when we’re doing well and
when we’re struggling—because life has treated us harshly or because
we made a mistake.23

[PDF page 169]

Nor is self-compassion the same as self-indulgence. Self-indulgence
is what you do to numb emotional pain rather than allowing it to
complete the cycle. Olivia’s moments of compulsive sexuality are an
extreme example, but for most of us self-indulgence takes the form of
binge-watching Netﬂix or eating a pint of Ben & Jerry’s in one sitting
because “I deserve it,” instead of feeling our Feels. Self-indulgence is a
form of freeze, sedating the lion instead of escaping or conquering it.
Emotional pain is exhausting, and sometimes it’s necessary to take a
break from the pain, numb out for a while. Just remember what happens
when the sedated lion comes out from under the anesthesia. The cycle
has to complete, it wants to complete. Self-compassion is being patient
with yourself through that process—and being patient with yourself
when you need to take a break.
Here’s an exercise to help increase self-compassion:24
1. Write a description of a situation that you’re beating yourself up about—it can be
anything from an aspect of your sexual functioning to your romantic relationship (or lack
thereof) to your work to your body or anything else. Be sure to include the self-critical
thoughts you’re battering yourself with.
2. Then write the name of a good friend at the top of the page and imagine that that
person is describing this problem. Imagine that she’s asking for your help, and write down
what you would tell her. Imagine that you’re in your best, most empathic, calmest, most
supportive state of mind, and tell her all the things she needs to hear.
3. Now reread what you wrote. It’s for you.
The shorthand version of this exercise is: Never say anything to
yourself that you wouldn’t want to say to your best friend or your
daughter.
Olivia told me this story about how she ﬁgured out how to stop
hitting the gas pedal when she got stressed out.
One night during ﬁnals week, Olivia tried initiating sex at
bedtime.
Patrick, predictably, was too tired, and said so.
In the wake of his gentle refusal, self-doubt ﬂooded through
Olivia like a fast-rising river. What if her high sex drive wasn’t cool
or sexy or fun or empowered? What if she was just trying
desperately—pathetically—to get attention the only way she
could? What if actually she was just trying to control people with

[PDF page 170]

her sexuality? What if— Her heart was racing and she felt like she
couldn’t breathe.
Into the darkness, she reached out to her partner. “Patrick?”
“Yeah.”
“I’m having a meltdown.”
“It’s ﬁnals week. It happens. Deep breaths.”
“No, I’m having a meltdown about sex.”
“Babe, I’m so tired . . .”
“No, I know, I’m not saying that!” She explained in a breathless
panic about the ﬂood of self-doubt, adding her sudden recollection
that her theory about testosterone and her genitals and her
sexuality was wrong. “What if all the things I’ve told myself about
my sexuality are just an invention to mask the truth that actually I’m
totally just this bully using my sexuality to manipulate you? What if
I’m out of control and, like, a danger to myself and others?”
Patrick turned on the light and looked at her. “Wow, I had no
idea you had so much of this cultural brainwashing still buried in
your brain. It’s like the anxious part of your brain seriously believes
all the women-who-like-sex-are-evil stuﬀ, and when you’re stressed
out, all those beliefs come with the stress—even though the calm
version of your brain totally knows how awesome you are. Keep
breathing, babe, you’re holding your breath.”
And there it was.
When she was happy and relaxed, she had one set of opinions
about herself: self-conﬁdent and self-compassionate. When she
was overwhelmed, she had an entirely diﬀerent set of opinions
about herself: self-critical and even self-abusive.
And the negative opinions she had when she was stressed just
added another level of stress and escalated the situation, which
made her feel all the more self-critical, which eventually activated
her least adaptive coping strategies. It was like trying to douse a
ﬁre by pouring gasoline on it.
Solution?
Stop adding fuel to the ﬁre. Notice that you’re doing it, and do
something else. Let the ﬁre burn itself out.
She had already ﬁgured out that exercise helped her complete
the cycle, coasting to the end of the biological stress cycle without
hitting either the brakes or the gas. In the next chapter, she’s going
to learn how to do the same thing with sex.

[PDF page 171]

maximizing yum . . . with science! part 2: cognitive dissonance
In chapter 1, I recommended that you take a good look at your genitals
and notice the things you like. Well, now I’m suggesting that you take oﬀ
all your clothes—or as many as you can bring yourself to take oﬀ—and
look at your entire body in a mirror. And make a list of everything you
see . . . that you like.25
Of course the ﬁrst thing that will happen is your brain will be ﬁlled with
all the self-criticism and disgust you’ve been holding on to for all these
years. Remind yourself that the day you were born, your body was a
cause for celebration, for love without condition, and that’s just as true
today as it was then. Let these self-critical thoughts go, let the
judgments go, and notice only the things you like.
Do this over and over again—every day if you can. It will be hard at
ﬁrst, and there will be lots of complicated and conﬂicting emotions. It will
be noisy in your head. Even now, as you consider doing it, you might be
noticing a lot of, “But Emily!” noise in your head. It’s okay. As I’ll
describe in chapter 9, there is an inevitable grieving process involved in
letting go of old ideas about your body. It will hurt the way your hands
ache when you come in from the cold—gradually they get warmer and
then they feel great. Christopher Germer calls this “backdraft,”
referencing the explosion that occurs when you add fresh air to an
oxygen-deprived ﬁre.26 You have to allow the hurt to go through theprocess, let it complete its cycle.
Practice ignoring the self-critical, judgmental thoughts and focusing
on the self-appreciating thoughts. And gradually it will become easier to
celebrate your body as it deserves to be celebrated, to treat it with the
respect and aﬀection it deserves, and to approach sex with conﬁdence
and joy. Which is the point!
maximizing yum . . . with science! part 3: media nutrition
Exposure to media that reinforces body self-criticism increases body
dissatisfaction, negative mood, low self-esteem, and even disordered
eating.27 This is perhaps most clearly illustrated by a multiyear study of
the impact of Western media—especially television—on young women
in Fiji.28 In a culture where there had been “a clear preference for a

[PDF page 172]

robust form,”29 after three years of exposure to late 1990s American
television (think Melrose Place and Beverly Hills 90210), rates of
disordered eating among teenage girls rose from 13 percent to 29
percent, with 74 percent reporting that they “feel too big or too fat,” in
sharp contrast to pre-TV culture. And this wasn’t just a blip—ten years
later, rates of disordered eating still hovered around 25–30 percent.30
If there were a food that consistently made you sick, you’d stop eating
it. So if there’s media that makes you feel more self-critical, stop looking
at it.
As you’re looking at movies or television or porn or magazines, ask
yourself, “After I see this, am I going to feel better about my body as it is
today, or worse?” If the answer is “better!” then do more of that!
Increase your exposure to the media that helps you celebrate your body!
But if the answer is “worse,” stop it. You don’t have to get mad and
write a letter to the editor or anything (though if you want to, feel free!),
just pay attention to how magazines and TV shows and music videos
make you feel, and stop buying anything that makes you feel worse. You
don’t need to be trained in media literacy and all the ways that you’re
being manipulated with digital alteration of images in order to know
when something is making you feel better or worse about yourself.
And if it makes you feel worse, evidence suggests that it’s interfering
with your sexual wellbeing—even if you’ve been taught to believe that
feeling worse about your body “motivates” you to “improve” your body.
That’s a psychological trap you never need to be caught in again. Stop
watering the weeds.
By limiting your exposure to media that makes you feel worse about
yourself, you’re not just improving your own sex life, you’re also voting
with your eyeballs, your ears, and your cash. You’re joining an audience
that will pay attention only to things that make women feel better about
themselves. Wouldn’t it be amazing to live in a world where performers
and artists and media outlets were competing to make the largest
number of women feel fantastic about their bodies right now? On behalf
of women everywhere, thank you for anything you do to make that real!
you do you
We started this chapter with three cultural messages that all of us have
been exposed to in one way or another over the course of our lives: the

[PDF page 173]

moral message, the medical message, and the media message. All
three messages are blended into our individual psyches; none of us lives
with just one, and none of us wholly believes any of them. They’ve been
layered over each other in our culture, each partially absorbing the
others. The contradictions inherent in the three are a source of women’s
confusion about how sex is supposed to work.31 Your faith community
tells you one thing, your media culture tells you another, and your doctor
seems to have a diﬀerent attitude entirely.
So whom should you believe? What messages can you trust to
promote your own sexual wellbeing?
The answer is: yourself.
Listen to your own inner voice, which hears all these messages and,
somewhere deep inside you, will sound an alarm when it notices bullshit.
We’re all diﬀerent, so what feels true and what feels like nonsense will
vary from person to person. The only possible answer is: Choose what
feels right for you and ignore what doesn’t feel right.
Informational cherry picking like this is a bad idea in science and in
moralism. Scientiﬁc and moral systems, though diﬀerent from each other
in almost every single other way, share the quality of developing
coherent structures of meaning where one idea hangs upon the others,
the way loops of metal hold chain mail armor together. When you’re
working in a scientiﬁc or a moral framework, an idea must take its place
in the context in which it was intended.
But most of us are just trying to live our lives as best we can. When it
comes to investigating and understanding your own individual sexuality,
you should cherry-pick. The moral views may be sincere, the media
exciting, the doctors apparently expert, but you need not buy in to any
system in order to create a coherent narrative of your own sexual self.
You don’t need to believe you’ll go to hell if you have sex before
marriage in order to decide whether waiting to have sex is a good choice
for you. You don’t need to believe you’re sick or broken in order to wish
you could just take a pill and want sex out of the blue. And you don’t
need to believe that the key to great sex is ﬂavored lube, a giant vibrator,
and the ability to deep-throat in order to want to explore, try new toys,
new tricks, and new partners.
And even though I’d love you to ﬁnd meaning in every page, every
paragraph of this book, cherry-pick from here, too. We’re all diﬀerent, so
what’s relevant for you is deﬁnitely, absolutely not the same as what’s
relevant for me or for any of the many hundreds of women I’ve taught.

[PDF page 174]

Take what’s relevant. Ignore what isn’t; it’s there for somebody else who
needs it.
Treat cultural messages about sex and your body like a salad bar.
Take only the things that appeal to you and ignore the rest. We’ll all end
up with a diﬀerent collection of stuﬀ on our plates, but that’s how it’s
supposed to work.
It goes wrong only when you try to apply what you picked as right for
your sexuality to someone else’s sexuality.
“She shouldn’t eat those beets; beets are disgusting.”
They might be disgusting to you, but maybe she likes beets. Some
people do. And you never know, maybe one day you’ll try them and ﬁnd
you like them. Or not, that’s cool too. You do you.
“She shouldn’t have taken so many fried, breaded things—she’ll end
up with a heart attack!”
She might and she might not, but either way it’s her heart and her
choice. You do you. Absorb what feels right for you and shake oﬀ what
feels wrong. Let everybody else do everybody else, absorbing what
feels right for them and shaking oﬀ what feels wrong.
Laurie and Johnny’s story about “You’re beautiful,” sounds like a
story about body image or disgust, but really it’s about love.
Laurie’s body shame wasn’t just about the changes to her body.
She had absorbed cultural beliefs about what those changes
meant about her as a person. And because she believed her body
was evidence that she was somehow a lesser person, she hid
behind an emotional wall, so that no one could see those parts of
her she felt ashamed of. But that wall also stood between her and
the love she was starving for.
We build walls for a lot of reasons. To protect vulnerable parts of
ourselves. To hide things we don’t want others to see. To keep
people out. To keep ourselves in.
But a wall is a wall is a wall—it’s an indiscriminate barrier. If you
hide behind a wall to protect yourself from the pain of rejection,
then you also block out joy. If you never let others see the parts
you want to hide, then they’ll never see the parts you want them to
know.
When Laurie let the wall down, the love came ﬂooding in.

[PDF page 175]

No girl is born hating her body or feeling ashamed of her sexuality.
You had to learn that. No girl is born worried that she’ll be judged if
someone ﬁnds out what kind of sex she enjoys. You had to learn that,
too. You have to learn, as well, that it is safe to be loved, safe to be your
authentic self, safe to be sexual with another person, or even safe to be
on your own.
Some women learn these things in their families of origin. But even if
you learned destructive things, you can learn diﬀerent things now. No
matter what was planted in your garden, no matter how you’ve been
tending it, you are the gardener. You didn’t get to choose your little plot
of land—your SIS and SES and your body—and you didn’t get to
choose your family or your culture, but you do choose every single other
thing. You get to decide what plants stay and what plants go, which
plants get attention and love and which are ignored, pruned away to
nothing, or dug out and thrown on the compost heap to rot. You get to
choose.
•  •  •
In this second part of the book, I’ve described how context—your
external circumstances and your internal state—inﬂuence your sexual
wellbeing. I’ve talked about stress and love and body image and sexual
disgust, and I’ve described some evidence-based strategies for
managing all of these in ways that can maximize your sexual potential.
The next part of the book focuses on debunking some old and
destructive myths about how sex works. These myths are part of the
context in which women’s sexual wellbeing functions. In busting them,
my goal is to empower you to take total control over your context and
embrace your sexuality as it is, perfect and whole, right now. Even if you
don’t quite believe that’s true yet.
tl;dr
• We all grew up hearing contradictory messages about sex, and so now many of us
experience ambivalence about it. That’s normal. The more aware you are of those
contradictory messages, the more choice you have about whether to believe them.
• Sometimes people resist letting go of self-criticism—“I suck!”—because it can feel like
giving up hope that you could become a better person, but that’s the opposite of how it
works. How it really works is that when you stop beating yourself up, you begin to heal,
and then you grow like never before.

[PDF page 176]

• For real: Your health is not predicted by your weight. You can be healthy—and beautiful
—no matter your size. And when you enjoy living in your body today, and treat yourself
with kindness and compassion, your sex life gets better.
•  Sexual disgust hits the brakes. This response is learned, not innate, and can be
unlearned. Begin to notice your “yuck” responses and ask yourself if those responses are
making your sex life better or worse. Consider letting go of the yucks that are interfering
with your sexual pleasure—see chapter 9 to learn how.

[PDF page 177]

part 3
sex in action

[PDF page 178]

six
arousal
LUBRICATION IS NOT CAUSATION
When you’re a sex educator, you get phone calls like this one:
“Hey, it’s Camilla. Can I ask you a sex question?”
“Sure.”
“You won’t be grossed out?”
“Of course not.”
“Okay, so Henry and I were messing around and I said, ‘I’m
ready, I want you,’ and he said, ‘No, you’re not wet, you’re just
humoring me.’ And I said, ‘No, I’m totally ready!’ And he didn’t
believe me because I wasn’t wet. So . . . should I see a doctor? Is
it hormonal? What’s wrong?”
“If you’re having pain you should see a doctor, but otherwise
you’re probably ﬁne. Sometimes bodies don’t respond with genital
arousal in a way that matches mental experience. Tell him to pay
attention to your words, not your ﬂuids, and also buy some lube.”
“That’s it? Genital response doesn’t always match experience,
so buy some lube?”
“Yep. It’s called nonconcordance.”
“But that’s not what . . . I mean, is this some new scientiﬁc
discovery?”
“It’s kinda new. The earliest psychophysiological research I’ve
read that explicitly measures sexual arousal nonconcordance is
maybe thirty years old, though that—”
“Thirty years? Why did no one tell me this before?”
This chapter answers that question, and a whole lot more.
The idea that genital response doesn’t necessarily match a person’s
experience of arousal runs contrary to the “standard narrative” about
sex. As far as most porn, romance novels, and even sex education texts

[PDF page 179]

are concerned, genital response and sexual arousal are one and the
same.
For a long time, I thought the standard narrative was right—of course
I did, I believed what I was taught. We all do. So I had no idea what to
think when, in college back in the ’90s, a friend told me about her ﬁrst
experiences with power play in a sexual relationship:
“I let him tie my wrists above my head while I was standing up, and he positioned me so
that I was straddling this bar that pressed against my vulva, you know, like a broomstick.
And then he went away! He just left, and it was totally boring, and when he came back I
was like, ‘I’m not into this.’ He looked at the bar and he looked at me and he said, ‘Then
why are you wet?’ And I was so confused because I deﬁnitely wasn’t into it, but my body
was deﬁnitely responding.”
Like everyone who has ever read a sexy romance novel, I was sure
that wet equaled aroused. Desirous. Wanting it. “Ready” for sex. So
what could it mean that my friend’s genitals were responding, when she
really didn’t feel turned on or desirous at all?
What was going on?
Nonconcordance is what was going on.
In this chapter, I’ll describe the research on nonconcordance,
including answering questions like, Who experiences nonconcordance?
(Everyone, actually.) How do you know your partner is turned on, if you
can’t use their genitals as a gauge? (Pay better attention!) And how can
you help your partner understand your nonconcordance? I’ll also
address three wrong but beguiling myths about nonconcordance—and
these myths aren’t just wrong, they’re dangerously wrong.
I want everyone who reads this chapter to go on a spree of telling the
whole world about nonconcordance—that it’s normal, that everyone
experiences it, and that you must pay attention to your partner’s words,
rather than their genitals.
measuring and deﬁning nonconcordance
Put on your sex researcher hat again and imagine conducting an
experiment like this:1
A guy comes to the lab. You lead him into a quiet room, sit him down
in a comfortable chair, and leave him alone in front of a television. He
straps a “strain gauge” (which is exactly what it sounds like) to his

[PDF page 180]

penis, puts a tray over his lap, and takes hold of a dial that he can tune
up and down to register his arousal (“I feel a little aroused,” “I feel a lot
aroused,” etc.). Then he starts watching a variety of porn segments.
Some of it is romantic, some is violent, some features two men, some
features two women, and some features a man and a woman. He rates
his level of arousal on the dial as he watches, and the device on his
penis measures his erection. Then you look at the data to see how much
of a match there is between how aroused he felt—his “subjective
arousal”—and how erect he got—his “genital response.”
Result: There will be about a 50 percent overlap between his genital
response and his subjective arousal. It’s far from a perfect one-to-one
correlation, but in behavioral science it’s exciting to ﬁnd a relationship
that strong. It’s highly statistically signiﬁcant.
For the most part, both our research subject and his penis will
respond most to the porn that matches his sexual orientation: a gay
man’s genitals respond most to porn featuring two men, and he’ll report
the highest levels of arousal in response to it; a straight man’s genitals
respond most to porn featuring a man and a woman or else two women,
and he’ll report the highest level of arousal in response to it, etc.
Now let’s run the same experiment with a woman. Put her in that quiet
room, in that comfortable chair, and let her insert a vaginal
photoplethysmograph (essentially a tiny ﬂashlight that measures genital
blood ﬂow), and give her the tray and the dial and the variety of porn.
Result: There will be about a 10 percent overlap between what her
genitals are doing and what she dials in as her arousal.
10 percent.
It turns out that there is no predictive relationship between how
aroused she feels and how much her genitals respond—statistically
insigniﬁcant. Her genital response will be about the same no matter what
kind of porn she’s shown, and her genital response might match her
sexual orientation . . . or it might not.2
It’s called “arousal nonconcordance” and it’s totally a thing.3
This research has been in the media a lot. For example, Meredith
Chivers’s nonconcordance research was described in the New York
Times and in a number of popular books recently.4 Chivers’s work
builds on the research of, among others, Ellen Laan, whose
nonconcordance studies were also covered in the New York Times a
decade earlier.5 Chivers replicated Laan’s ﬁnding of greater arousal
nonconcordance in women compared to men, with the innovation of

[PDF page 181]

showing research participants not only a variety of porn and nonsexual
videos but also videos of nonhuman primates—bonobos, to be speciﬁc
—copulating. It turns out women’s genitals respond to bonobo sex, too,
though not as much as to porn.

[PDF page 182]

There is about a 50 percent overlap between what a male’s genitals respond to as “sexually
relevant” and what his brain responds to as “sexually appealing.” And there is about a 10

[PDF page 183]

percent overlap between what a female’s genitals respond to as “sexually relevant” and what
her brain responds to as “sexually appealing.” Men’s genitals are relatively speciﬁc in what they
respond to, and so are their brains. Women’s genitals are relatively general in what they respond
to, while their brains are more sensitive to context. Note that a stimulus can be “relevant” without
being appealing.

[PDF page 184]

What the media coverage has failed to make clear is that women’s
genital response is actually very discriminating—compared to other
automatic physiological responses. For example, your Achilles tendon
reﬂex, heart rate, and skin conductance (sweating) will all increase after
watching a scary segment of the movie Cujo and after watching porn.
But your genitals have no interest in Cujo.6 In fact, women’s genitals
don’t respond to any of these videos: waves crashing on a beach, the
joyful “Ain’t No Mountain High Enough” scene from the movie
Stepmom, the achingly sad telegram delivery scene in A League of
Their Own, or a ﬁrst-person view of a roller coaster.7 Genital response isspeciﬁc to sexually relevant stimuli—regardless of whether those stimuli
are sexually appealing.
The genitals tell you, “That’s sexually relevant.”
The person tells you, “That turns me on,” or “I am enjoying this,” or “I
am eager for more, please.”
For women, there’s about a 10 percent overlap between “sexually
relevant” and “sexually appealing.” For men, there’s about a 50 percent
overlap.
What we’re seeing in nonconcordance is the diﬀerence between
expecting and enjoying, from chapter 3. Genital response is the
automatic, trained response to something that’s sexually relevant.
Pavlov’s dogs salivated when a bell rang, not because they wanted to
eat the bell but because their expecting system had linked the bell with
food. Similarly, your emotional One Ring has learned what’s sexually
relevant (remember babies Frankie and Frannie in chapter 2, and the
rats in jackets?), and your expecting system activates physiological
responses to whatever it has learned is sexually relevant.
A stimulus can be sexually relevant and yet be sexually unappealing,
as my college friend from the start of the chapter experienced. And
remember the blog reader from chapter 2, who emailed me that “brakes
and accelerator at the same time” described her experience reading
Fifty Shades of Grey. Her genitals responded, but she didn’t feel
“turned on”; the book included explicit sex, so it was sexually relevant,
but it also hit her brakes because she didn’t particularly like the
characters or the story, and that made it sexually unappealing.
What happens when a man takes erectile dysfunction medication?
It increases blood ﬂow to the genitals during sexual stimulation.

[PDF page 185]

What happens when a woman takes erectile dysfunction
medication?
Same thing.
And what happens when you increase blood ﬂow to a woman’s
genitals?
Not a lot. Because: nonconcordance.
Olivia and Patrick tried it. They took an ED pill together as an
experiment in ﬂipping the chasing dynamic—and also, because,
Why not? (NB: “Why not?” includes no known medical beneﬁt and
unknown medical risk. Taking a prescription medication without a
doctor’s supervision is always risky. But let’s be real here. People
do it.)
Olivia’s lips—the lips on her face, that is—turned dark, dark red,
so that she looked like she was wearing lipstick. Other than that,
she didn’t notice any particular eﬀect. For once, Olivia’s
experience was typical of most women’s.
Patrick, on the other hand, felt like he’d taken an aphrodisiac.
Olivia looked irresistibly beautiful, and his skin felt like the volume
had been turned up on his nerve endings, so that every sensation
was ampliﬁed, magniﬁed. They went out for ice cream after they
took the drug, for something to do while they waited for it to kick
in, and they had to turn right back around because Patrick couldn’t
wait to get Olivia naked.
Erectile dysfunction drugs don’t do any of this; all they do is
increase blood ﬂow to the genitals. Such is the power of placebo,
as I described in chapter 2. The same thing happened
occasionally when Patrick had a few drinks and Olivia was the
designated driver.
This rare experience of being the one with the lower sexual
interest was revelatory for Olivia. As a woman who always felt
driven forward by her sexual interest, pulling her partner along with
her, being the one who was standing still and being pulled, as it
were, was an inspiring experience. She allowed herself to receive
Patrick’s erotic attention. She allowed her arousal to build as
slowly as it wanted to.
She allowed it to happen, instead of feeling like it was dragging
her forward.

[PDF page 186]

all the same parts, organized in diﬀerent ways: “this is a
restaurant”
Nonconcordance is about the relationship between the peripheral
system—the genitals—and the central system—the brain: two separate
but interconnected systems. And the relationship between these
systems is diﬀerent for women and men.
Imagine that the brain and the genitals are a couple of friends on
vacation together, wandering down the street trying to decide where to
have dinner.
If they’re women, it goes like this: The genitals notice any restaurant
they pass, whether it’s Thai food or pub grub, fast food or gourmet
(while ignoring all the museums and shops), and say, “This is a
restaurant. We could eat here.” She has no strong opinion, she’s just
good at spotting restaurants. Meanwhile, the brain is assessing all the
contextual factors I described in chapters 4 and 5 to decide whether she
wants to try a place. “This place isn’t delicious smelling enough,” or
“This place isn’t clean enough,” or “I’m not in the mood for pizza.” The
genitals might even notice a pet store and say, “There’s pet food in
here, I guess . . .” and the brain rolls her eyes and keeps walking.
They pass a museum, and the brain says, “I heard about a great café
in this museum,” and the genitals respond, “This isn’t a restaurant.” But
the brain has way more information than the genitals. So suppose the
two friends go into the museum, and the genitals see the little café next
to the gift shop. Then she says, “Oh, I see, this is a restaurant. We could
eat here,” and the brain says, “Yeah, this looks great.” Both relevant
and appealing!
Now, if the friends are men, it goes like this: The genitals notice only
speciﬁc restaurants—diners, say—and don’t notice any restaurants that
aren’t diners. Once they ﬁnd a diner, the brain says, “A diner! I love
diners,” and the genitals agree, “This is a restaurant, we could eat
here,” unless there’s some pretty compelling reason not to, like a bunch
of drunks brawling outside.
You should be able to chant this in your sleep by now: We’re all made
of the same parts, just organized in diﬀerent ways. The relationship
between the brain and genitals follows the same principle. The male
genital system has strong, quite speciﬁc opinions about what counts as
sexually relevant, while the female genital system is good at recognizing
a broad category of things that generally qualify as sexually relevant. If

[PDF page 187]

our two women on vacation came across that diner with a brawl outside,
the genitals would still say, “This is a restaurant,” even as the brain
dragged her away, shouting, “Let’s get out of here! Call the cops!”
In other words, women’s genitals learn to associate certain stimuli
with certain physiological responses that have nothing to do with
pleasure or even interest. The pressure on my college friend’s vulva—
the bar between her legs while she was tied up—triggered an automatic
genital response without triggering arousal. “This is a restaurant,” said
her genitals, but her brain wasn’t interested.
nonconcordance in other emotions
Nonconcordance is not just a sex thing. It shows up in all kinds of
emotional experiences and is a puzzle to all kinds of emotion
researchers.8
For example, suppose I show you a picture of an emotionally intense
scenario—maybe the face of a viciously snarling dog, or a wounded
child sitting alone—and it causes you to experience an emotion, a
physiological response. And then I ask you to say a fact about the
scenario or else to say how the picture makes you feel. Which of those,
saying the fact or saying the feeling, will reduce your physiological
response?
When researchers did this experiment, people reported that saying a
fact about an emotional situation helped to reduce the emotion, more
than saying the feeling they were experiencing—and the tension in their
voice reﬂected that.9 But their skin conductance (a reliable measure ofthe stress response) went down when they named the feeling, not when
they named a fact. That is, their physiological stress response was
nonconcordant with their experienced emotion. Normal.
Ross Buck, professor of communication sciences at the University of
Connecticut, has a handy way of thinking about emotion that will help us
to understand nonconcordance.10 He describes three levels of emotion:
Emotion I is the involuntary physiological response—your heart rate
and blood pressure, pupil dilation, digestion, sweating, immune
functioning. Genital response falls into this category, and my college
friend who got wet while she was bored, tied up waiting for her partner
to come back, experienced this kind of response . . . but nothing else.

[PDF page 188]

Emotion II is involuntary expressive response to a feeling. It’s body
language—or, more accurately, “paralanguage”—things like vocal
inﬂection, posture, and facial expression—all the cues we use to infer
another person’s internal state. A great dinner date will be full of Emotion
II, as you ﬁnd yourself putting your hand on your date’s arm, gazing into
their eyes, and smiling. These are often inﬂuenced by culture, but have
a great deal of universality, and they can be intentionally controlled to
some degree, but not as much as you might think. Did you choose the
expression on your face right now?
Emotion III is your subjective experience of a feeling. If someone asks
you how you feel and you check in with yourself to ﬁnd the answer, what
you’re noticing is Emotion III. This is subjective arousal—the conscious
experience of “I want you so much I can hardly stand it”—which may or
may not be accompanied by genital response (Emotion I) or eye contact
(Emotion II).
It might even be true that there are stable gender diﬀerences in
nonconcordance between physiological response and subjective
experience for emotions other than sexual arousal.11 For whatever
reason—cultural, biological, or both (probably both)—women have more
overlap between their facial expressions (Emotion II) and their
subjective experience (Emotion III), while men have more overlap
between their skin conductance (Emotion I) and their subjective
experience (Emotion III).12 What this research suggests is that awoman’s emotional experience is more likely to line up with her facial
expression and her vocal inﬂection, while a man’s emotional experience
is more likely to line up with his heart rate and blood ﬂow.
Whether or not there’s a gender diﬀerence, it’s fair to say that what
you experience as your emotional life doesn’t necessarily line up neatly
with what your brain and body are doing. That doesn’t make you a liar, it
doesn’t make you crazy, and it doesn’t mean you’re in denial. It means
you’re a human being, whose emotional and motivational responses
may be more complex than any other species’. Nonconcordance shows
up in many kinds of emotional experiences, and men and women
experience nonconcordance diﬀerently in those emotions. It’s not a sex
thing; it’s a human thing.
You have to relax before you can trust. But women who are slow
to trust, like Merritt, can’t relax until they feel trust. It’s a problem.

[PDF page 189]

The solution came when she was trying to solve a diﬀerent
problem.
As a woman in her forties, entering menopause, lack of
lubrication just seemed like a part of life for Merritt. Her concern
was more for her partner. Carol was the birth mom of their teenage
daughter, and she had struggled with intermittent genital pain ever
since the birth. I recommended lube to make manual sex more
comfortable.
Merritt was into it. All I had to say was, “There are a bunch of
diﬀerent kinds of lube, so you might—” and she was online,
browsing for a variety pack.
The box arrived in the mail. They set a date—Friday night, with
the teenager away on a camping trip—and when the night arrived,
they split a half bottle of wine and got started.
They took the importance of context seriously and started with a
romantic movie and then took turns retelling each other their “Story
of Us.” 13 This is a trick they adapted from John Gottman’s
relationship research—they narrate to each other how they met
and fell in love, to remind each other (and themselves) of the
meaning of their shared life, their aﬀection and admiration for each
other. It works diﬀerently for each of them; it activates Carol’s
accelerator by making her feel in love, and it deactivates Merritt’s
brake by making her feel trusting of her partner.
But Merritt’s diﬃculty wasn’t trusting her partner, it was trusting
herself. And what she learned this night is that it becomes easier
to trust herself when she can see how her body brings pleasure to
her partner.
Trying out the diﬀerent kinds of lube turned sex into play,
instead of a problem, which switched her from what she calls
“noisy brain,” where everything is perceived as a threat, to “quiet
brain,” where everything is perceived with curiosity and pleasure.
(Remember the rat who didn’t like Iggy Pop.) She paid close
attention to how Carol experienced each type of lube.
As she relaxed into the pleasure of observing her partner’s
pleasure, she found that when she connected with the experience
of giving pleasure, her own pleasure could expand inside her,
without all the brakes and worries and fretting.
She swam in the water.

[PDF page 190]

And it happened when she moved her focus away from her own
worries and onto the task of increasing her partner’s pleasure.
The next step, of course, was to be able to enjoy her own
pleasure. But before she could get there, she had to knock down a
wall in her own mind. She’ll do that in chapter 7.
lubrication error #1: genital response = “turned on”
I’ve noticed three errors about nonconcordance that perpetuate
dangerous cultural myths about women’s sexuality. Let’s do away with
them, okay?
The ﬁrst way to be dangerously wrong about nonconcordance is
failing to recognize that it exists in the ﬁrst place. Let’s call this
Lubrication Error #1.
Nonconcordance isn’t news—or it shouldn’t be. Sex researchers have
had an increasingly clear idea that nonconcordance is a thing for a
decade or two now. It’s been in the news, it’s been described in
mainstream sex books . . . and yet my students and blog readers are
routinely surprised to learn about it, and both porn and mainstream
culture continue to perpetuate the myth that genital response = sexual
arousal. Now that you know about nonconcordance, you’ll see people
getting it wrong all over the place.
So what gives? Why does it feel so new, when every other year a
book comes out that talks about it?
When I asked this question in my class, a student raised her hand
and said with comic sourness: “patriarchy.”
Totally.
For centuries, male sexuality has been the “default” sexuality, so that
where women diﬀer from men, women get labeled “broken.” Even men
who diﬀer from the standard narrative get labeled “broken.” Men have,
on average, a 50 percent overlap between their genital response and
their subjective arousal, and therefore, the patriarchal myth goes,
everyone should have a 50 percent overlap.
But women aren’t broken versions of men; they’re women.
If it weren’t about men-as-default, then we’d all be just as likely to
wonder, “What’s up with men, that they have so much overlap?” as we
are to wonder, “What’s up with women, that they have so little overlap?”
But no one asks about men. No student, no blog reader, no fellow sex

[PDF page 191]

educator, no one anywhere has ever asked me, “Why are men so
concordant? Isn’t that kind of . . . ?” The only people who ask that
question are the sex researchers.
So I’m going to ﬁght patriarchy with patriarchy. Let’s make
nonconcordance universally acknowledged, by understanding how it
aﬀects men.
Every guy, at some point in his life, has the experience of wanting sex,
wanting an erection, and the erection just isn’t there. In that moment, the
erection (or lack of erection) isn’t a measure of his interest—he might
even wake up the very next morning with an erection, when it’s nothing
but an inconvenience.
Guys sometimes wake up with erections, not because they’re turned
on but because they’re waking up out of rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep, and one of the things that happens during REM is “nocturnal
penile tumescence.” Erections come and go throughout the sleep cycle,
whether or not you’re dreaming about sex. It doesn’t mean anything, it’s
just an erection. It’s nonconcordant.
Most boys, around adolescence, experienced unwanted genital
response—sitting at the back of the bus, noticing a teacher’s body, his
own ill-ﬁtting pants, or even just general excitement about nonsexual
things (driving a car, eating a donut, really anything) can activate the
relevant pathways and generate the physiological response in a teenage
boy.
But genital response is not desire; response isn’t even pleasure. It is
simply response. For everyone, regardless of their genitals. Just
because a male body responds to a particular idea or sight or story
doesn’t mean that he necessarily likes it or wants it. It just means it
activated the relevant pathways—expecting. “This is a restaurant.”
(Remember: Men’s 50 percent overlap between genital response and
arousal is highly statistically signiﬁcant . . . but it’s still just 50 percent.)
Sometimes guys notice their bodies responding to something even
when their brains are saying, “That’s not okay.” And they feel conﬂicted,
because on the one hand it’s clearly sexual, but on the other hand it’s
Seriously Not Okay.
I’ll give you an example (and feel free to skip the next two paragraphs
if you’re triggered by sexual-assault-related things).
When I was in college, I was hanging out with a group of guy friends,
and one of them—I’ll call him Paul—told a story about a buddy of his. At
the end of a party, when there were people sleeping or passed out all

[PDF page 192]

over the house, Paul found his buddy having sex with a girl who was
passed out drunk, unresponsive, and clearly unaware of what was
happening. I say “having sex with,” but the technical term is “raping.”
And the buddy says, “Hey, you want to try this?” And my friend telling
the story says, “Nah. We gotta go.”
The reason that’s all he said, Paul told us, rather than, “What are you
doing, you douchebag? Get the hell away from her,” was that he felt torn
between his gut instinct that what his friend was doing was Seriously
Not Okay and the automatic reaction of his body to the sight of sexual
intercourse. He got an erection. He was horriﬁed at himself, at the idea
that any part of him might interpret this Seriously Not Okay situation as
erotic.
Back when I heard this story, I had no idea what was going on.
Genital response was arousal, I thought. It was similar to my other
friend’s story about being wet even though she was bored—though in
this case, the guy was not bored but actively horriﬁed!
What was going on?
What was going on was expecting without either eagerness or
enjoying. His body recognized the sight before him as sexually relevant
and, either because he was disinhibited by alcohol or else was just a
low-brakes kind of guy, his brakes did not prevent his body from
responding to the sexually relevant stimulation. “This is a restaurant,”
his penis told him, even though there was a brawl happening.
Let’s imagine a diﬀerent story, in a world where everyone knows
about nonconcordance.
Because Paul knows that what his genitals are doing indicates only
what’s sexually relevant, not what’s sexually appealing, not only does he
not feel ashamed of himself or wonder if he, too, might be a rapist, but
the absence of all that shame creates space in his brain for doing
something more proactive to intervene! He can tell his friend to stop
because what he’s doing is an act of violence, a crime. Or he can call
the cops and have the friend arrested, and he can take the girl to the
emergency room to have evidence collected, HIV prophylaxis
administered, and emergency contraception oﬀered. Or at the very, very
least he can ﬁnd a friend to help her. He can be a hero.
Genital response doesn’t mean anything but sexually relevant—
expecting, essentially a conditioned reﬂex—not enjoying. It doesn’t
indicate desire or pleasure or anything else. And by carving out space,

[PDF page 193]

once and for all, for nonconcordance, we’re actually making the world a
better place for everyone.
In the end, Lubrication Error #1—Genital Response = “Turned On”—
is actually just old school metaphorization, like the medieval anatomists
from chapter 1 (“pudendum,” because shame!), though maybe without
the moral message.
You know that the size of a phallus (clitoris or penis) doesn’t say
anything about how ashamed a person is (or should be) of their genitals.
At most, phallus size often—not always—predicts whether they have
ovaries or testicles. Similarly, blood ﬂow to the genitals doesn’t say
anything about what they want or like (or should want or like). No. At
most, blood ﬂow to the genitals often—not always—is simply information
about whether they have been exposed to something that their brain
interpreted as sexually relevant—with no information about whether they
liked it.
lubrication error #2: genital response is enjoying
A second, more science-y way to be dangerously wrong about
nonconcordance is to pay attention to the science and then tell the
wrong story about it, to decide that women’s genitals are the “honest
indicator” of what really turns them on, and the women are lying, in
denial, or just culturally oppressed out of awareness of their own deep
desires. Let’s call this Lubrication Error #2.
This tempting—and wrong—explanation for nonconcordance lines up
neatly with various cultural misconceptions about women’s sexuality,
like the Moral, Medical, and Media Messages that I described in chapter
5 and like the man-as-default myth. Here’s a common misconception:
Women have been socially programmed not to admit that they’re
actually turned on by certain things (like violent sex or lesbian porn), so
when they report their perceived arousal, they’re lying or in denial about
their hidden desires, or possibly both. But what their genitals are doing
is what’s really true.
Daniel Bergner’s What Do Women Want? Adventures in the Science
of Female Desire begins with a description of nonconcordance
research, followed immediately by a description of lie detector research.
The conclusion readers are forced to draw is that women are lying—or
possibly just in denial—about their arousal. Here’s how Amanda Hess

[PDF page 194]

summarized it in her review at Slate.com: “Straight women claimed to
respond to straight sex more than they really did; lesbian women
claimed to respond to straight sex far less than they really did; nobody
admitted a response to the bonobo sex.”14
Note the “claimed” and the “really” and the “admitted.”
Of course you know that women’s genitals were just reacting
automatically to a sexually relevant cue—“This is a restaurant”—which
has only a passing acquaintance with what a woman “really” likes or
wants. Readers of What Do Women Want? didn’t get that lesson,
though. They got Lubrication Error #2.
Sex-positive feminists like writer Amanda Hess embrace the idea that
women’s bodies could be contradicting the outdated morality-based
cultural narratives about women being “less sexual” than men: Look
how much our genitals respond to stuﬀ! Look how sexual we really are!
Right? That’s an appealing story—as if our bodies are showing us a
secret, wildly sexual self that could be into anything if we just gave
ourselves the permission that our culture has been denying us for
centuries!
And after all, women have been subjected to oppressive cultural
messages that made it shameful for them to acknowledge and pay
aﬀectionate attention to their own sexuality—that’s what chapter 5 was
about. In fact this whole book is about paying attention to your own
internal experience and trusting your body. And what could be more
“trust your body” than “Your genitals are telling you what you like, even
when you don’t know it”?
Ah. It’s that word “like” that’s the problem. Like, enjoying.
But genital response isn’t enjoying. It’s expecting.
Your genitals are telling you something, and you can trust them.
They’re telling you that something is sexually relevant, based on their
experience of Pavlovian conditioning. “This a restaurant.” But that’s not
the same as sexually appealing.
Do, absolutely, trust your body. And interpret its signals accurately.
Genital response, which happens between your legs, is expecting.
Arousal, which happens between your ears, includes enjoying.
We see this myth—that a woman’s genitals can tell us more about
how she feels than she can—everywhere. For example, as part of my
research for this book, I read the bestselling novel Fifty Shades of Grey
by E. L. James. (Is that what everyone says? “Oh, it’s for research”?)
And there it was. Arousal nonconcordance in the ﬁrst spanking scene.

[PDF page 195]

During the spanking, heroine Anastasia tries to move away, she
screams in pain, and her “face hurts, it’s screwed up so tight.”15 There
is not one word about her liking the spanking as it’s happening.
Afterward, hero/spanker Christian Grey puts his ﬁngers in her vagina.
Now, knowing what you know about nonconcordance, listen to what
Grey tells Ana: “Feel this. See how much your body likes this,
Anastasia” (emphasis mine).16
Yeah, I wanted to spank him when I read that, and not in the sexy
way.
It gets worse, though, because Ana believes him, instead of believing
her own internal experience, which she describes as, “demeaned,
debased, and abused.”17
Certainly there are women who are turned on by being consensually
debased, but the whole plot pivots on the fact that Ana isn’t one of them.
So, E. L. James, if you’re reading this: Lubrication means it was
sexually relevant, which tells us nothing about whether it was sexually
appealing. Therefore I humbly request that in the next edition, Grey says
to Ana, “Feel this. See how sexually relevant your body considers
physical contact with your buttocks and genitals, Anastasia. That gives
me no information about whether or not you liked it. Did you like it? No?
Double crap, let me make it up to you by reading Emily Nagoski’s book
about women’s sexual wellbeing, so that I have a clue next time.”
Thank you.
•  •  •
If you’re ever in doubt that genital response is about expecting, without
necessarily any connection to enjoying or eagerness, just remember
this: Lubrication Error #2 wants to claim that we can know what women
really are turned on by when we measure what their genitals respond to.
That would mean that women whose genitals respond to images of
bonobos copulating really are, deep down, almost as interested in
watching nonhuman primates copulating as they are in watching porn.
Really? Come on.
Even in the face of such absurdities, it’s an incredibly persistent myth.
Alain de Botton, in How to Think More about Sex, goes so far as to
describe lubricating vaginas and tumescent penises as “unambiguous
agents of sincerity,” because they are automatic rather than intentional,
which means they can’t be “faked.”

[PDF page 196]

If that’s true, then when your doctor taps your knee’s patellar tendon
and your leg kicks out, that must mean you actually want to kick your
doctor.
Or when you have an allergic reaction to pollen, you must hate
ﬂowers.
Or when your mouth waters around a mouthful of moldy, bruised
peach, you must ﬁnd it delicious.
Don’t get me wrong—you might want to kick your doctor and you
might hate ﬂowers and you might enjoy moldy, bruised peaches. But
your automatic physiological processes are not how we would know
that. No. Automatic physiological processes are, ya know, automatic,
not sincere.
But it gets worse—it gets less funny and more dangerous.
If we persist in the false belief that women’s genital response reﬂects
what they “really” want or like, then we have to conclude that if their
genitals respond during sexual assault, it means they “really” wanted or
liked the assault.
Which isn’t just nuts, it’s dangerous.
“You said no but your body said yes” is an idea that shows up both in
the lyrics of pop songs and in the images at Project Unbreakable, an
online gallery of sexual assault survivors holding signs with phrases said
by their rapists, their families, or even police responders.18 But you
know by now that bodies don’t say yes or no, they only say, “That’s
sexually relevant,” without any comment on whether it’s appealing,
much less whether it’s wanted. A penis in a vagina is sexually relevant,
though it may be unappealing, unwanted, and unwelcome. There is no
wanting necessary for genital response. It’s just, “This is a restaurant,”
with no comment on whether it might be a good place to have dinner.
•  •  •
It’s an ancient fallacy, this notion that physiology can prove whether
someone likes something sexual. Until the 1700s, people believed that
conception was the pleasurable part of sex for a woman, so if a woman
got pregnant, she must have experienced pleasure, and if she
experienced pleasure, then the sex could not have been unwanted.19
Because, “She said no but her ovaries said yes.”
This myth has its own degree of traction, showing up in the public
discourse as recently as the 2012 Senate race in Missouri, when
Republican candidate Todd Akin said, “If it’s a legitimate rape, the

[PDF page 197]

female body has ways to try to shut the whole thing down,” which even
Mormon presidential candidate Mitt Romney described as, “insulting,
inexcusable and, frankly, wrong.”20
Sex researcher Meredith Chivers often says, “Genital response is not
consent.” Let’s add to that, “And neither is pregnancy.”
Genital response is no more an expression of pleasure, desire, or
consent than the fertilization of an egg is. I hope that is totally obvious to
you by now.
•  •  •
We metaphorize our bodies; we use descriptions of our physiology to
stand in for descriptions of our states of mind. “I’m so wet” and “I’m so
hard” are intended to say, “I’m into this.” These metaphors are so
entrenched that people believe they’re literal. Indeed, some people
actually want us to believe that women are lying—whether deliberately
or because we’ve been culturally oppressed out of the capacity to
recognize our own desires—when we say we’re not turned on but our
genitals are responding.
I hope that by now, six chapters into this book, you know better. You
know that male and female sexualities are made of the same parts, just
organized in diﬀerent ways, and you know that no two people are alike.
You know that what activates your accelerator or hits your brake is
context dependent. You know that women’s sexuality is even more
context sensitive than men’s, that developmental, cultural, and life
history factors all profoundly shape how and when our bodies respond.
You know that sexually relevant and sexually appealing are not the
same thing.
Women are not liars, in denial, or otherwise broken. They are women,
rather than men.
lubrication error #3: nonconcordance is a problem
The third way to be dangerously wrong about nonconcordance is to
decide that it’s a symptom of something.
Suppose you recognize that nonconcordance exists, you
acknowledge that it’s expecting without necessarily indicating enjoying
or eagerness, and then you read the research that shows there is a
correlation between nonconcordance and sexual dysfunctions related to

[PDF page 198]

desire and arousal.21 And so you decide that, because nonconcordance
is associated with dysfunction, nonconcordance must be a problem.
Which brings me to a sentence every undergraduate who takes a
research methods class will memorize: “Correlation does not imply
causation.” It refers to the cum hoc ergo propter hoc fallacy—“with this,
therefore because of this”—which means that just because two things
happen together doesn’t mean that one thing caused the other thing.
The quintessential example in the twenty-ﬁrst century is the
relationship between pirates and global warming.22 This is a joke madeby Bobby Henderson, as part of the belief system of the Church of the
Flying Spaghetti Monster. Henderson wanted to make a point about the
diﬀerence between causation and correlation, so he drew a graph that
apparently plotted increase in global temperature with the precipitous
drop in the number of seafaring pirates.
Did the loss of pirates cause global climate change?
Of course not. It’s absurd, right? That’s the point.
Actually, we can hypothesize a third variable that inﬂuenced both the
reduction in pirates and the change in global climate: the Industrial
Revolution.
Like this putative correlation between pirates and global temperature,
there’s also a correlation between nonconcordance and sexual
dysfunction. The correlation makes it easy to think that the
nonconcordance is causing the sexual dysfunction, or that the
dysfunction is causing the nonconcordance.
Turns out, no. Just as pirates and global temperature can be linked
together by the Industrial Revolution, nonconcordance and sexual
dysfunction are linked together by a third variable: context.
How does context link sexual functioning and concordance?
Sexually functional women have brakes that are sensitive to context,
turning oﬀ the oﬀs when they’re in the right context—which, remember,
means both external circumstances and internal mental state. Sexually
dysfunctional women’s brakes stay on, even in contexts where you
would expect them to turn oﬀ.
I’ll illustrate this with an extraordinarily clever study published in 2010.
Dutch researchers built an “ambulatory laboratory”—a take-home kit of
plethysmograph, laptop computer, and handheld control unit.23
Participants completed tests in the lab similar to other nonconcordance
research—viewing erotic stimuli and testing various automatic and
conscious responses—and they took the ambulatory lab home with

[PDF page 199]

them and tested themselves there, too. This way researchers could
measure how being in the lab inﬂuenced the results, compared to being
at home. In other words, they measured the eﬀect of context. They
studied two groups: eight women with healthy sexual functioning (the
control group) and eight women who met the diagnostic criteria for
“hypoactive sexual desire disorder” (the “low-desire” group).
Result: The control group’s genital response and subjective arousal
more than doubled when tested at home, compared to in the lab. Plus
they reported feeling “less inhibited” and “more at ease” at home. The
low-desire group’s genital response also doubled at home . . . but their
subjective arousal did not, nor did they report feeling less inhibited or
more at ease. Which is to say, they were less concordant because their
brakes didn’t turn oﬀ. Just being at home wasn’t enough to turn oﬀ the
low-desire women’s brakes.
The sexually satisﬁed women were more sensitive than women with
low desire to the change in context from the lab to home. Which is
exactly the result you’d expect if you assumed that women’s sexual
satisfaction is more dependent on sensitivity to context than on
sensitivity to genital response.24
Let me make that extra clear: The big diﬀerence between women in
the control group and women in the low-desire group was not what their
genitals were doing or even how aware the women were of what their
genitals were doing. The big diﬀerence was how sensitive their brakes
were to context.
Context sensitivity causes both the low desire and the
nonconcordance. Nonconcordance is not the problem. Context hitting
the brakes is the problem.
Context—external circumstances and internal brain state—is
fundamental to most women’s sexual wellbeing; increasing sensitivity to
context, rather than to genital response, is what makes the diﬀerence.
Context is the crux and the key. Context is the cause.
medicating away the brakes
I’ve spent my career teaching people how to change their external
circumstances and heal their central nervous systems in order to
maximize their sexual potential. In other words: how to change their

[PDF page 200]

contexts. And this kind of education is eﬀective at improving people’s
sexual wellbeing.25
But boy, it would be easier to just take a pill, right? A pill that
temporarily turns oﬀ your brake—the elusive “pink Viagra.”
One of the authors of that ambulatory lab paper is aiming to make just
such a pill. Adriaan Tuiten is a lead investigator in developing new drugs
for “female sexual dysfunction,” one of which is intended to turn oﬀ the
brakes.26
It’s a really smart idea, targeting medications to the brakes and to
women whose brakes are most prone to getting stuck.
So can you turn oﬀ the oﬀs with a drug? Research is under way and
has been published, including a series of three papers in 2013.27
The regimen for the brake-targeted intervention is described in the
research this way: Four hours before having sex—or a “sexual event,”
as the researchers call it—drop a testosterone solution under your
tongue and swish it around for about a minute. Two and a half hours
later, take a pill. Then, an hour and a half after that, have some sex.
Voilà!
Did it work? You decide:
The women in the study rated their “sexual satisfaction” with “sexual
events” both with a placebo and with the drug. Half of the women
experienced no signiﬁcant change. But half the women (the “high
inhibitors” group) experienced a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
sexual satisfaction. With the placebo, they reported being 50.2 percent
satisﬁed, on average, with a given sexual event. With the drug, 59.6
percent satisﬁed.
Would you schedule sex for a speciﬁc time, drop testosterone under
your tongue four hours beforehand, and then take a pill two and a half
hours after that in order to increase your satisfaction that night from 50
to 60 percent?28
And what else might increase your satisfaction with a “sexual event”
that much?
How about if you felt really beautiful?
Or if you felt profoundly, deeply trusting of your partner?
Or if you felt like you had 100 percent permission to take as long as
you wanted to become fully aroused and your partner would love every
second of it?
Or, if you have a history of trauma, as so many women do, if you felt
you could more completely release that trauma and fully engage with

[PDF page 201]

pleasure in the present moment?
Would that increase your satisfaction by 10 percentage points? More
than 10?
•  •  •
The drug is designed to turn oﬀ your brakes by changing your brain,
rather than by changing the context to which the brakes are responding.
As the researchers write: “Ideally, sexual dysfunction in human subjects
should be described in terms of a constellation of interacting
mechanisms, both biological and psychological, which at the same time
should provide an adequate indication for treatment.”
This is an excellent example of medical model thinking, since it pays
attention to biology and even psychology but ignores relationship and
social factors—in other words, it ignores women’s actual lives. You can’t
medically treat a whole life or a relationship, so why bother taking them
into account when trying to ﬁgure out how to treat sexual problems?
The reason to bother is that life factors like relationship satisfaction
and trauma history signiﬁcantly impact sexual wellbeing—I’m thinking
way more than 10 percent—and they can be changed. Kids can be
baby-sat and parenting can be shared by multiple adults; relationships
can be strengthened; trauma can be healed.29
We don’t need to reduce nonconcordance. We need to improve the
contexts—external circumstances and internal states such as stress,
attachment, self-criticism, and disgust. It doesn’t take a pill to do that.
Here’s a thing that happens to me sometimes: A wife drags her
husband over to me and says, “Tell him what you told me.”
Laurie did that with Johnny at a lunch buﬀet. “Tell him what you
told me. The arousal thing. Tell him, please.”
“He didn’t believe you?”
“He thinks I ‘must have misunderstood.’ ”
So I told him: “Okay, Johnny. I know this is the opposite of
everything you’ve ever learned about sex, but it’s true: The state of
Laurie’s vagina doesn’t necessarily tell you anything about her
state of mind.”
She thwacked him on the arm with the back of her hand and
raised her eyebrows, as if to say, “See?”
He looked at me and he looked at her and he looked back at
me and he opened his mouth to ask a question and then he

[PDF page 202]

closed it again.
Then he said to Laurie, “Go away, honey.”
She did—not before giving me a knowing glance.
In a conﬁdential whisper, he said to me, “If I can’t go by her
genitals, how do I know she really wants me? Because she could
totally just be saying she wants me when really she’s just being
nice.”
Johnny is a dude-bro, manly, ﬁx-it kind of guy. I like him a lot,
and often my role is to translate the science of women’s sexual
well-being into Manly Fix-It Dude-Speak for him. So I started by
saying, “Arousal is not about her genitals, it’s about her brain.”
Then I described the sexual response mechanism as a set of on
and oﬀ switches, with each associated with a particular kind of
input—genital sensations, relationship satisfaction, stress,
attachment, etc.—that throws a switch on or oﬀ. Men’s and
women’s sexual response mechanisms have the same set of dials
and switches, but they tend to be tuned to diﬀerent levels of
sensitivity, so that just a little bit of genital stimulation throws an on
switch for men, while just a little bit of stress throws an oﬀ switch
for women. Laurie’s life, I explained, was throwing all the oﬀ
switches.
He said, “You’re saying I’ve got this strong input from my body,
but her strongest input is from her . . . life?”
“Yes!”
“So to hack the system, what I need to be paying attention to is
the stuﬀ that’s hitting the brakes, because once those are oﬀ, the
accelerator will take over. Is that what you’re saying?”
“Yes. You’ve got it. I think she wrote a list of stuﬀ that hit her
brakes—”
“She did,” he said. “I’ve seen it. I didn’t know what to do with it,
but now . . .” He stared at me for a moment, then shook his head
and said, “This really changes everything. What this says is that
the sexiest thing I can do isn’t some crazy erotic thing. The sexiest
thing I can do is take away as many of the brakes as I can, which
is . . . I mean, I can do that. Just . . . why did no one tell me this
before?”
“honey . . . I’m nonconcordant!”

[PDF page 203]

If you’ve got a body that doesn’t always match your mind, then you’ve
got a body that deﬁes conventional (and wrong) wisdom, and so you
might ﬁnd yourself in the position of having to correct your partner’s
understanding. There are three things to remember, which can resolve
any problem your nonconcordance may generate.
First, remember that you are healthy and functional and whole. Your
body is not broken and you are not crazy. Your body is doing what
bodies do, and that’s a beautiful thing. Hooray! So know that you are
normal. Tell your partner you are normal, calmly, joyfully, and
conﬁdently. No need to be defensive or aggressive—it’s not your
partner’s fault for not knowing about nonconcordance. Actually, it’s more
my fault and the fault of all the other sex educators and researchers. We
have failed to communicate this idea clearly to the world, and now you’re
stuck with the job of ﬁxing our mistake. Sorry about that. So apologize
for me, on behalf of all the sex educators and researchers in the world,
and then give your partner the facts:
“Emily Nagoski is sorry that you didn’t already know that genital response isn’t a reliable
indicator of sexual arousal. But it’s true. What my genitals are doing doesn’t necessarily
have anything to do with how I feel. Thirty years of research conﬁrms this. So please pay
attention to my words, not my vagina.”
You don’t have to actually apologize for me; you can just email me
and say, “Could you please email my partner an apology for their not
knowing about nonconcordance?” and I’ll do it myself. Seriously, I will.
Second, oﬀer your partner other ways to tell that you’re turned on.
No woman, on learning about nonconcordance, asks, “But if my
genitals aren’t telling me I’m aroused, then how do I know when I’m
turned on?” It’s only the men who say, “If I can’t tell by her genital
response, then how do I tell that she’s into it?”
That makes sense, especially if they’re guys who experience a high
degree of concordance themselves. It’s natural to construct a framework
of sexuality based on your own experience and not quite know how to
deal with someone whose framework is diﬀerent from yours.
So here are some alternative things your partner can pay attention to,
if your vagina is telling only about expecting, not about enjoying:
• Your breath. Your respiration rate and your pulse increase with arousal. You begin
holding your breath, too, as you get to the highest level of arousal and your thoracic and
pelvic diaphragms contract.

[PDF page 204]

• Muscle tension, especially in your abdomen, buttocks, and thighs, but also in your wrists,
calves, and feet. When the tension moves in waves through you, your body bows and
arches. For some women, in some contexts, this happens in an obvious way. For other
women, or in other contexts, it is subtle. It’s a cue.
• Most important, your words. Only you can tell your partner what you want and how you
feel. Not all women feel equally comfortable talking about their desire and arousal, but you
can shortcut with “yes” or “more” or “blrgpfh!”
And remember this, too: It’s not about attending to any speciﬁc
physiological response, behavior, or other clue. It’s about attending with
a kind of broad, receptive vigilance. Suggest that your partner attend to
you not with a magnifying glass but with the wrong end of a telescope,
or the way a chess master watches a chessboard—looking for large-
scale patterns and dynamics. Your partner should attend the way a
master chef tastes food—not just for individual ﬂavors, but for the way
those ﬂavors combine and create something unique and new and
delicious.
Third and ﬁnally, deal with any lack of lube-on-demand by
supplementing with the ﬂuid of your choice: your saliva or your partner’s
(when there’s no risk of infection transmission), your partner’s genital
ﬂuids (ditto), store-bought lube, whatever.
What is lube for? Reducing friction, which can increase pleasure, and
it always decreases the risk of tearing and pain. And always use lube
with protective barriers like condoms or dams. Lube increases their
eﬃcacy and makes them more pleasurable. Lube is your friend. Lube
will make your sex life better.30
Sometimes people feel uncomfortable introducing outside sources of
lube into their sexual connection. This hesitancy may stem from any
number of life events or from simple inexperience with it or from a sense
that using lube means you’re somehow inadequate. Remember the
sanctity moral foundation. Sex-related stuﬀ gets categorized as “dirty,”
even when it’s a bottle ﬁlled with something you ﬁnd in many hair
products.
But you know now that vaginal lubrication has its own way of being in
the world, which may or may not have anything to do with your sexual
interest and arousal. You know that lube is important because it reduces
friction, which increases both health and pleasure. And you know that
you get to choose which beliefs you nurture and which you weed out.

[PDF page 205]

If you decide to try using lube, here are some tips for talking with your
partner about it:
• Playfulness, Curiosity, and Humor. It is literally impossible to feel stressed and anxious
about something when your approach is playful, curious, and humorous. Let it be a little
silly; let it be fun. This is about pleasure, remember?
•  Make Your Partner Feel Like a Superhero. Communicating about sex feels risky
sometimes because, above all, you don’t want to hurt your partner’s feelings. The simplest
shortcut around hurt feelings is to make the conversation about all the things your partner
can do to increase your pleasure beyond its already skyrocketing heights, and all the
delight you hope to add by incorporating this new element to your sexual connection.
• Choose Your Lube Wisely. Not all lube is created equal. Often it’s a good idea to choose
lube together with your partner—shop together and pick something you both feel good
about, so that you are both equally invested in it.
May I recommend that you consider silicone lube? I am a silicone lube
evangelist. Here are just a few reasons why:
•  Safe to Use with Barriers. Use it with both male (external) condoms and female
(internal) condoms, latex or polyurethane.
• Thick. It doesn’t dribble all over in a runny mess. Especially for marathon sex (anything
longer than ten or ﬁfteen minutes counts as “marathon” as far as lubrication on genitals is
concerned) or anal sex, lube staying where you put it is important.
• Lasts Longer than You Do. It simply does not evaporate. It lasts a long, long, long, long
time. It’s expensive, but you need to use only a tiny bit, so one bottle goes a long way.
• Dries to a Silky Powder Finish. Whereas water-based lubes often dry to a sticky, gummy
mess on your hands, silicone lubes feel soft and powdery, so you can caress your
partner’s body and face without feeling like you’re smearing spirit gum all over your lover.
• Great for Sensitive Folks. It’s also very unlikely to cause an allergic reaction or yeast
infections (unlike ﬂavored lubes or lubes with glycerin), it has no ﬂavor, so you can taste
your partner’s skin and ﬂuids (yum!).
The one thing silicone lube isn’t good for is use with some silicone
toys. It may break down the surface of the toy, so put condoms on them,
or else use water-based lube.
The best silicone lube will have just a few ingredients, like
dimethicone, dimethiconol, cyclopentasiloxane, or cyclomethicone, and
a preservative like tocopheryl acetate (vitamin E). That’s all.

[PDF page 206]

ripe fruit
Let’s go back to the garden for a minute.
For a male gardener, if the fruit in his garden is ripe, he’s usually in
the mood for fruit—not always, but often enough that if you notice some
ripe fruit, it’s worth asking yourself if the gardener might be craving
some.
For the female gardener, it takes a lot more than ripeness to feel like
having fruit. Maybe she wants fruit most when she’s feeling happy.
Maybe fruit is what she turns to when she’s feeling sad. Regardless, her
desire for fruit has little to do with how good she is at noticing that there
is ripe fruit in the garden. It has much more to do with—you guessed it—
the contexts in which she enjoys ripe fruit.
Got it?
Good.
Camilla explained nonconcordance to Henry. For her,
nonconcordance was a perfect example of how the cultural
narrative had failed to tell her the truth, and she was pretty
pleased to ﬁnd another way she was, yet again, totally normal.
It was a little more complicated for Henry, because he was still
ﬁguring out the whole desire/wanting thing. He was trying to get
comfortable with the diﬀerence between the brakes version of not
wanting—“I want that to stop”—versus the accelerator version of
not wanting—“I like that yet feel no urge to seek out more.”
He said, “I understand that genital response doesn’t tell me
what turns you on. You tell me what turns you on, and I believe
you. But what I don’t understand is how you get turned on without
ﬁrst wanting the thing that turns you on.”
Which is maybe the most complex—and controversial—element
of women’s sexual wellbeing.
The answer to Henry’s question is: Arousal comes ﬁrst—before
desire, that is. Like this: Genital response happens when your brain
notices a sexually relevant stimulus—“This is a restaurant.” Arousal
happens when your brain is in the right, sex-positive context—when
your brain is open to the idea of going to a restaurant. Desire comes
along when your brain shifts from being open to the idea to actively
wanting to go.

[PDF page 207]

And it’s the subject of chapter 7.
tl;dr
• There’s a 50 percent overlap between blood ﬂow to a male’s genitals and how turned on
he feels. There’s a 10 percent overlap between blood ﬂow to a woman’s genitals and how
turned on she feels.
• The reason for the diﬀerence is that sexually relevant (expecting) is not the same thing
as sexually appealing (enjoying). In men there’s a lot of overlap between the two, most of
the time; in women the overlap is more context dependent.
• This diﬀerence between women and men doesn’t mean women are broken; it means
they’re women.
• The best way to tell if a woman is aroused is not to notice what her genitals are doing but
to listen to her words.

[PDF page 208]

seven
desire
ACTUALLY, IT’S NOT A DRIVE
It’s a basic fact of their relationship that Olivia wants sex more
often than Patrick does, so she ends up initiating most of the time.
But Olivia’s experience of being the target of Patrick’s placebo-
powered rampant lust the previous night had given her a powerful
insight: It had felt good to be open to sex, without feeling driven to
have sex. It had felt good to allow sexual desire to pull her
gradually and gently toward sex, rather than feeling like it was
pushing her.
So as the next step in their experiment, they tried ﬂipping their
usual dynamic on its head. They set a “date night” and then didn’t
do anything to prepare; they just showed up that night in their
usual states of mind—Olivia ready to go, Patrick not disinterested,
but not actively interested either.
And they made Olivia follow her partner’s lead, while Patrick
started to explore what kinds of things he could do to shift himself
into active interest. They spent a lot of time “preheating the oven”:
kissing and talking and massaging—and, surprisingly, a little
adventure, moving from the bedroom to the kitchen to feed each
other. When Patrick was in charge with full permission to do
whatever occurred to him, they tried new things and played
together. They learned a lot about what context worked for Patrick,
because he had to create that context, had to ask for what felt
right.
They learned a surprising thing about Olivia, too: When she
stayed still enough to move at Patrick’s pace rather than her own
naturally faster pace, the gradual buildup and the sustained
arousal and the necessity of holding herself back created a

[PDF page 209]

context that wasn’t just as good as the context that worked for her.
It was unbelievably better.
Olivia emailed me: “One of the rules we set was I had to ask for
permission before I had an orgasm. And he did not always say yes
when I asked. Um, we’ll be doing that again.”
In other words: Creating a great sex-positive context for the
lower-desire partner resulted in a context that was mind-blowingly,
almost painfully erotic for the higher-desire partner.
This chapter is about why and how that works.
Imagine a world where everyone has desert plants in their gardens—
aloe plants and dragon trees and ﬁddlenecks and yuccas—and
everyone knows how to tend them: lots of sun, very little water.
And imagine that you happen to have a tomato plant in your garden.
Everybody “knows,” in this desert world, that plants need very little
water, so you water your tomato plant sparingly . . . and it slowly dies.
You wonder, “Maybe I’m watering it too often? Maybe there’s not
enough sun?” And you continue to water and watch, and you wonder,
“Why is it dying? I’m doing what I’m supposed to do!”
A tiny shift in knowledge—the bare fact that tomato plants are better
adapted to a subtropical climate than to a desert, so they thrive on more
water—can change how you tend your garden . . . which can bring your
tomato plant back to life.
Now, if someone comes along and oﬀers this bare fact, there still will
be those who say, “Plants don’t need lots of water, that’s part of what it
means to be a healthy plant!” Others will say, “Tomato plants are crazy
—broken!—to need all that water!” Some will search for a remedy for
the tomato plant, to make it more like an aloe. And there will be tomato
gardeners who simply can’t let go of the idea that they’re supposed to
be able to produce abundant fruit on almost no water at all, and they will
do anything to have a tomato plant that thrives in the desert.
But you try it. You give your tomato plant more water.
And you go from “Why is it dying?” to “Wow!” as you’re rewarded
with abundant fruit and lush, fragrant greens. All because of a tiny shift
in knowledge.
This chapter is about one such tiny shift in knowledge, which can
move your relationship with your sexual wellbeing from “Why is it
dying?” to “Wow!” And it’s this: responsive desire.1
Responsive, in contrast to spontaneous desire.

[PDF page 210]

The standard narrative of sexual desire is that it just appears—you’re
sitting at lunch or walking down the street, maybe you see a sexy person
or think a sexy thought, and pow! you’re saying to yourself, “I would like
some sex!” This is how it works for maybe 75 percent of men and 15
percent of women.2 That’s Olivia. That’s “spontaneous” desire.
But some people ﬁnd that they begin to want sex only after sexy things
are already happening. And they’re normal. They don’t have “low”
desire, they don’t suﬀer from any ailment, and they don’t long to initiate
but feel like they’re not allowed to. Their bodies just need some more
compelling reason than, “That’s an attractive person right there,” to
want sex. They are sexually satisﬁed and in healthy relationships, which
means that lack of spontaneous desire for sex is not, in itself,
dysfunctional or problematic! Let me repeat: Responsive desire is
normal and healthy.3 And it’s how roughly 5 percent of men and 30percent of women experience desire. That’s Camilla. Only about 6
percent of women lack both spontaneous and responsive desire.4
You’ll notice this leaves about half of women and about one in ﬁve
men unaccounted for. These are folks whose desire style is probably—
drumroll, please—context dependent. That’s Merritt and Laurie. And
they’re normal, too.
But actually? It turns out everyone’s sexual desire is responsive and
context dependent. It just feels more spontaneous for some and more
responsive for others, because even though we’re all made of the same
parts, the diﬀerent organizations of those parts results in diﬀerent
experiences.
So in this chapter I’ll explain what responsive desire is, how it works,
how to make the most of it, and what to do if you and your partner have
diﬀerent desire styles.
We’ll start with where desire comes from: Desire is arousal in context.
And then we’ll talk about what desire is not—it’s not a drive, not a
“hunger”—and why that matters so much. Which will bring us to the
surprising truth about what desire is: It’s curiosity. When we understand
how curiosity works, we’ll also understand why sex sometimes feels like
a drive, even though it never is. We’ll spend some time talking about
what’s unlikely to cause desire problems—hormones and monogamy—
and what is much more likely to cause desire problems—sex-negative
culture and the chasing dynamic.
And we’ll wrap up the chapter with three strategies for maximizing
desire, based in the best available evidence.

[PDF page 211]

desire = arousal in context
Here’s how sexual desire really works. First, arousal begins when you
activate the accelerator and take pressure oﬀ the brake—turn on the ons
and turn oﬀ the oﬀs. (And of course, because you’ve read chapter 6, you
know that arousal is what happens between your ears, not what
happens between your legs.) And then desire comes along when
arousal meets a great context.
People can experience this in a variety of ways,5 depending on the
context and the sensitivity of their brakes and accelerator. To illustrate,
let’s think through three diﬀerent scenarios, each with the same
stimulation, same brakes and accelerator, but diﬀerent contexts.
Scenario 1. You’re feeling very calm and happy and trusting, not
doing anything in particular, and your partner comes over and touches
your arm aﬀectionately. The touch travels from your arm, up your spine,
to your brain. In this state of mind, your central nervous system is very
quiet, there’s very little other traﬃc, and the sensation of your partner’s
touch says, “Hey, so, this is happening. What do you think?” And your
brain says, “Aﬀection feels nice.” The stimulation continues, your
beloved partner touching your arm aﬀectionately, and the sensation
travels up to your brain and says, “This is happening some more. What
do you think?” And your brain says, “Aﬀection feels really nice,” and
tunes its attention more to that sensation. Then your partner starts
kissing your throat, and that sensation makes its way to your emotional
brain and says, “Now this is happening, too. What do you think?” And
by then the brain says, “That is fantastic! Go get more of that!” In that
context, sexual desire feels responsive.
Scenario 2. You’re stressed, exhausted, or overwhelmed, it’s very
noisy in your brain, there’s heavy traﬃc, lots of yelling and horns honking
about all the stuﬀ that’s stressing you out. Your partner’s aﬀectionate
touch travels from your arm, up your spine, to your brain, and it says,
“This is happening. What do you think?” And your brain says, “WHAT? I
CAN’T HEAR YOU OVER ALL THIS NOISE!” And by then the
sensation is over. (Sensations are a little bit like Snapchat.) If your
partner keeps touching you, the sensation keeps asking your brain,
“This is still happening. What do you think?” And eventually it might get
your brain’s attention, and your brain might say, “ARE YOU KIDDING
ME? I’VE GOT ALL THIS OTHER NOISE TO CONTEND WITH!” And

[PDF page 212]

if the sensation ever gets noticed enough to expand out of your brain’s
emotional One Ring, it comes out in the form of, “Not now, honey.”
Scenario 3. Your sexy, sexy partner has been away for two weeks,
but you’ve been sending each other frequent texts, which started out
ﬂirty but have been gradually escalating in explicitness and intensity as
you get more and more into teasing and tormenting each other. By the
end of the two weeks, just the sound of your phone receiving a text
makes you gasp and tremble. There’s noise in your brain, but all of it is
chanting, “Sexy, sexy partner!” By the time your partner gets home and
touches your arm aﬀectionately, you’re set to go oﬀ like a rocket. In that
context, sexual desire feels spontaneous.6
Camilla and Henry had embraced her erotic “slow heater” and
were collaborating to ﬁnd contexts that activated her accelerator.
But Henry was left with a lingering discomfort that it felt forced to
do things to turn Camilla on when she wasn’t already “in the
mood.” It felt somehow unnatural.
Sometimes you can watch a fact drop into a person’s brain like
ink into water. I saw it happen when I explained to Camilla and
Henry that, in fact, her desire style was totally normal.
“Arousal comes ﬁrst, before desire—for everyone, not just
Camilla,” I said.
“Arousal comes ﬁrst?” Henry said.
“Yup. Desire emerges when arousal crosses the person’s
individual threshold. Camilla, you happen to have a high threshold,
but it’s the same basic process for everyone.”
“You are kidding me,” Camilla said. “Seriously, has pop culture
gotten anything right about sex?”
Henry didn’t give me a chance to answer—this was important
for him, the solution to his turn-Camilla-on-when-she-doesn’t-yet-
want-sex conundrum. “You’re saying we just have diﬀerent
thresholds, is that right?”
“Right.”
For Henry, sometimes just seeing Camilla walking around after
a shower was all the arousal it took to activate desire. He said,
“And I like that! I like seeing her walking around all damp and
naked. I wouldn’t want her to stop doing it just because I wasn’t
turned on before I saw her. So . . . if the equivalent is true for

[PDF page 213]

you”—he turned to Camilla—“I don’t have to feel uncomfortable
creating equivalent contexts for you, right?”
“I want you to!” said Camilla. “Tease my ticking pilot light! Build
up the water pressure!”
So that’s what they decided to do. Henry turned everything into
low-key, no-pressure, zero-expectation foreplay, the way her
walking around after a shower was a kind of low-level foreplay for
him. Cuddling and touching. Slow kisses. Flowers. Aﬀectionate
attention. Like when they were ﬁrst falling in love—a constant,
steady stream of reminders that, “This guy is amazing!”
Henry loves Camilla’s enthusiastic desire, and all it takes to get
her there is enough stimulation, built up gradually.
This is not a story we see very much in pop culture because it’s
not about tension and ambivalence. But it turns out this is how it
works for a lot of women.
not a drive. for real.
A lot of women, on learning that they have a responsive or context-
sensitive desire style, feel instantly relieved to know that there’s nothing
wrong with them, that they just need more of a reason to have sex than
folks with a spontaneous style do. They get busy understanding the
contexts that make them hot and talking with their partner about ways to
increase access to those contexts.
But some women feel disappointed, and I can understand that. Many
of us have been taught that the capacity to want sex in almost any
context is not only preferable but actually the only “normal” way to
experience desire. The spontaneous desire style is so privileged in our
culture, so valued, that it’s easy to feel disempowered if that’s not your
primary style.
And in part, this is the male-as-default myth at work again. Just like
concordant arousal, spontaneous desire gets called “normal,” while any
other desire style gets called “abnormal,” just because spontaneous
desire is typical (though far from universal) in men.
But I think it’s more than that. I think the cultural dominance of
spontaneous desire is actually grounded in the myth of sex as a drive.
A drive is a biological mechanism whose job is to keep the organism
at a healthy baseline—not too warm, not too cold, not too hungry, not

[PDF page 214]

too full. A traditional metaphor for a drive system is a thermostat: When
the temperature drops below a critical point, the thermostat notices and
switches on the heat, and then when the temperature gets back in the
desired range, the heat switches oﬀ. The temperature bounces around
within a few degrees of the set point.
Appetite is the classic example of a drive. Hunger for food drives
foraging and eating, and then when you feel full, you stop eating. There
are lots of other drives: Thirst drives ﬂuid consumption, fatigue drives
sleep, thermoregulation drives shivering, sweating, taking oﬀ a sweater,
or turning up the thermostat. Hunger and thirst are motivational systems
that push you to do the things you have to do in order to avoid dying.
The uncomfortable (“aversive”) internal states of thirst, exhaustion, and
cold push you out into the world, to go meet a need, so that you can
return to a baseline, and that baseline is all about staying alive.
When you hear “drive,” think “survive.”
“Drive” is how scientists thought about sex for a long time. Helen
Singer Kaplan’s triphasic model, discussed in chapter 2, describes
sexual desire as one of the “drives or appetites that subserves individual
or species survival.”7 For centuries, scientists thought sex was a
“hunger.” It’s probably how you think about it, too. It’s how I thought
about it for a long time.
Turns out, no.8
It’s easy to prove that sex is not a drive: As animal behaviorist Frank
Beach put it in 1956, “No one has ever suﬀered tissue damage for lack
of sex.”9 We can starve to death, die of dehydration, even die of sleep
deprivation. But nobody ever died because of not being able to get laid.
Maybe they wanted to, but that’s diﬀerent (and the topic of a later
section). There is no baseline to return to and no physical damage that
results from not “feeding” your sexual desire.
Instead, sex is an “incentive motivation system.”
Most people associate the word “incentive” with the idea of a prize,
something worth working for. The biological meaning is similar. Instead
of feeling pushed by an uncomfortable internal experience, like hunger,
incentive motivation systems are all about being pulled by an attractive
external stimulus.
When you hear “incentive motivation,” think “thrive.”
Drive 
  survive. Pushed by an unpleasant internal state, which ends
when you return to baseline.

[PDF page 215]

Incentive 
  thrive. Pulled by an attractive external stimulus (the
incentive). It ends when you’ve obtained the incentive.
In a lot of systems, such as food appetite, both mechanisms are at
work, which is why we can want delicious food even when we’re not at
all hungry.
But sex is not a drive.
why it matters that it’s not a drive
It’s been a debate for a long time. On the one hand, animal researchers
like Beach have known sex isn’t a drive since at least the middle of the
twentieth century. On the other hand, the model of sexual response
used by the American Psychiatric Association until 2013 was a drive
model. And on the third hand, there’s the political side of the question:
Do people need sex?
I think it matters a lot that we end the debate and just recognize that
sex is an incentive motivation system, because look what happens if we
think of sex as an appetite that drives survival:
If sex were a drive, like food appetite, then the 30 percent of women
who rarely or never experience spontaneous desire for sex are . . . well,
what would we call a person who never experienced spontaneous
hunger for food, even if she hadn’t eaten in days or weeks or months?
That person is deﬁnitely sick! If sex is a hunger and you never get
hungry, then there’s Something Wrong With You. And when you believe
there’s something wrong with you, your stress response kicks in.10 And
when your stress response kicks in, your interest in sex evaporates (for
most people). Insisting that sex is a drive is telling a healthy person with
responsive desire that she’s sick—say it often enough and eventually
she’ll believe you. And when she believes you, suddenly it’s true. The
worry makes people sick.
So understanding that sex is an incentive motivation system—that
responsive desire is normal and healthy—will give everyone a better sex
life. If you have responsive desire and want to experience more active
desire, you don’t need to change you, you can just change your context.
But pathologizing responsive desire as low desire isn’t the worst
consequence of the sex-as-drive myth. There’s a larger social justice
reason for sex educators’ ﬁghting against the myth of sex as a drive for
more than a hundred years.11 A far worse consequence is that when sex

[PDF page 216]

is conceptualized as a need, it creates an environment that fosters
men’s sense of sexual entitlement. Nicholas Kristof and Sheryl
WuDunn’s book Half the Sky illustrates how the assumption that boys
require outlets to “relieve their sexual frustrations” facilitates the sexual
enslavement of impoverished girls. If you think of sex as a drive, like
hunger or thirst, that has to be fed for survival, if you think that men in
particular—with their 75 percent spontaneous desire—need to relieve
their pent-up sexual energy, then you can invent justiﬁcations for any
strategy a man might use to relieve himself. Because if sex is a drive,
like hunger, then potential partners are like food. Or like animals to be
hunted for food.
And that’s both factually incorrect and just wrong.
This matters. If we think sex is a drive, like hunger, then we might
start giving it privilege it doesn’t deserve. But if, on the other hand, we
treat it like the incentive motivation system it is, might not the culture
change? Might the culture be less tolerant of the suﬀering of girls, if that
suﬀering isn’t to feed boys’ hunger but only feeds their interest? Maybe
not, I don’t know. But I do know that men’s sexual entitlement is a
primary reason they sexually assault women.12 It seems to me that if you
believe your erection means you have a “basic survival need,” then the
sex-as-drive myth—combined with long-standing cultural attitudes that
women aren’t allowed the same sexual agency as men—turns toxic,
fast.
I know everyone has told you that sex is a drive. I know that even the
newest sex research sometimes holds fast to the idea of spontaneous
desire as a drive.13 And to make it even more confusing, sometimes sexresearchers who know better say, “sex drive,” in the same way atheists
say, “Thank God.” The language is so embedded in the culture that
even people whose entire knowledge system is contrary to the fact still
use the words.
But sex isn’t a drive.
Please tell everyone you know.
“but emily, sometimes it feels like a drive!”
Some of you will be wondering, “So how come there are times when
sexual desire feels like an unpleasant internal state? How come it feels
like a drive?”

[PDF page 217]

And the answer is: The same thing that makes Groundhog Day a
funny movie.
In the movie, Bill Murray’s character wakes up each morning in the
same hotel, to the same radio show on his alarm, on the same
despairingly familiar day: February 2, Groundhog Day. He is forced to
live the day over and over and over again.
After asking for help, to no avail, from his producer, from a doctor,
from a psychiatrist, and ﬁnally, while drunk at a bowling alley, from two
random guys in ﬂannel shirts, he concludes that he can do whatever he
wants because there are no consequences. Hijinks ensue. And
eventually he decides to seduce his producer, played by Andie
MacDowell. Groundhog Day after Groundhog Day, he woos her and
courts her and memorizes French poetry, trying to get her into bed and
gradually falling in love with her  .  .  . and Groundhog Day after
Groundhog Day, he ends up getting slapped in the face. Over. And over.
Again. He keeps failing at his goal, a goal that is becoming increasingly
important to him, until at last he gives up in despair.
And so he kills himself. Over. And over. Again. He can’t even die.
A bunch of other stuﬀ happens and I don’t think I’m spoiling anything
if I say it has a happy ending. It’s a good movie, I recommend it, but
what does it have to do with sexual desire?
The brain mechanism ﬁring Bill Murray’s eﬀorts to ﬁnd his way out of
Groundhog Day, to win Andie MacDowell, and to die is the same brain
mechanism that makes sexual desire feel like a drive. Here’s how it
works.
Imagine a little monitor, like a referee, sitting next to your brain’s
emotional One Ring.14 She’s got two jobs, this monitor:
1.  She watches to make sure the world is behaving according to her expectations
(expectations set by all her previous experience with the world).
2. She directs the investigation when there is any discrepancy between the world and her
expectations.
When the world is meeting her expectations, the monitor feels
satisﬁed. Nothing is lacking. But sometimes there is a gap between the
world and the expectations—some ambiguity needs to be resolved,
some novelty needs to be explored to see where it ﬁts in the expected
order of things, or some very appealing stimulus needs to be
approached and obtained.15 When this happens, she goes into

[PDF page 218]

command mode. She makes reducing the discrepancy her purpose in
life. Her entire world is made up of these three things:
• The goal state of closing the gap—which might mean resolve the ambiguity, explore the
new thing, approach the incentive, or simply complete the task
• The eﬀort you’re investing in the pursuit of that goal state—the attention, resources, and
time you’re allocating to it
• The progress you’re making toward that goal state
In Bill Murray’s case, the goal state is, among other things, Andie
MacDowell; the eﬀorts he invests are all the hilarious things he tries, like
memorizing her favorite drink and toast (“To world peace”); and the
progress he makes is absolutely nil—until the very end, of course.
When sex feels like a drive, the goal state is the sexually appealing
incentive—usually a partner, but if you have a very sensitive accelerator,
the world might just be a turn-on all the time. The eﬀorts you invest are
all the pitching woo and initiating and seduction you can muster. Exactly
what this is varies from culture to culture and from person to person.
(There’s the old joke: What’s foreplay to an Irishman? “Brace yourself,
Bridget.”) And your progress is how much closer you get to engaging
sexually with the appealing incentive.
So the little monitor keeps track of how much progress you’re making
in relation to how much eﬀort you’re investing. She tallies your eﬀort-to-
progress ratio, and she has a strong opinion about what that ratio should
be. This opinion is called “criterion velocity.”16 And this is where it gets
really interesting.
When the monitor feels that you’re making good progress—when
you’re matching or exceeding the criterion velocity—she is satisﬁed,
motivated, eager. But when the monitor feels that you’re not making
enough progress, she begins to become frustrated, and she prompts
you to increase your eﬀorts to get closer to your goal. If you still aren’t
making enough progress to satisfy the little monitor, she begins to get
angry . . . and then enraged! And eventually, if you continue to fall short,
at a certain point the little monitor gives up and pushes you oﬀ an
emotional cliﬀ into the “pit of despair,” as the monitor becomes
convinced that the goal is unattainable. You give up in hopeless
desolation.
Bill Murray’s little monitor goes berserk. Boy howdy, is the world not
following the rules, and nothing—not even dying!—is eﬀective in
reaching the goal. What the hell?!

[PDF page 219]

When you’re continually failing to reach a sexual incentive, your little
monitor grows frustrated and then angered and eventually despairing.
And that’s why it sometimes feels like an unpleasant internal
experience. It’s not the desire itself that feels unpleasant, it’s your
criterion velocity being unsatisﬁed. In other words, it’s not how you
feel . . . it’s how you feel about how you feel.
•  •  •
When I teach about the little monitor, my students’ eyes widen and their
jaws drop. The little monitor is a crucial part of your sexual wellbeing,
but she shows up in nearly every domain of life. If you’ve felt the thrill of
winning a race or a game, that’s your little monitor having her criterion
velocity satisﬁed—eﬀort-to-progress ratio met or exceeded! If you’ve
experienced road rage, that’s your little monitor’s how-long-this-trip-
should-be-taking criterion velocity going unmet—eﬀort-to-progress ratio
much too large! If you’ve ever collapsed in a hopeless heap in the face
of failure, that’s your little monitor reassessing a goal state as
unattainable, uncontrollable. The little monitor and her opinions about
how eﬀortful things should be is the foundation of a wide range of
frustrations and satisfactions, sexual desire not least among them.
impatient little monitors
Our culture absolutely teaches us to have impatient little monitors, with
criterion velocities set as small as they can be, which means many of us
are easily frustrated, enraged, and eventually despairing when we can’t
get what we want—including sex. We can extend this, too, and notice
how responsive-desire folks feel about their “lack” of desire: If you feel
like you should want sex, but you don’t, you’ll begin to get frustrated . . .
and will that frustration make you more likely to want sex?
Quite the opposite.
The little monitor is a gremlin of irony.
Unlike the One Ring and the brakes and accelerator, we can create
intentional change in the little monitor. Actually, humans may be the only
species that can do something deliberate about this kind of frustration,
and I bet if you think critically about it for a minute you can work out how
to do it.
There are three potential targets of change, right?

[PDF page 220]

There’s the goal. For spontaneous folks, the goal is the object of
desire, and for responsive folks, the goal is the desire itself. There’s the
eﬀort you’re putting in. And there’s the eﬀort-to-progress ratio that
causes you to feel satisﬁed or dissatisﬁed, the criterion velocity. So that
means there are three questions to ask yourself when you’re
experiencing frustrations around sexual desire:17
• Is this the right goal for me?
• Am I putting in the right kind of eﬀort, as well as the right amount?
• Am I realistic in my expectation about how eﬀortful this goal should be?
In terms of managing sexual desire in your relationship, the key is to
diﬀerentiate between the desire and your feelings about the desire. The
skill from chapter 4 of staying over your own emotional center of gravity
(treating your Feels like a sleepy hedgehog) will come in handy, as you
make sure you take responsibility for your own feelings and ask for
support from your partner.
Another useful skill in managing your little monitor is to work with the
natural prioritization of diﬀerent goals, as I described in chapter 4. There
are all kinds of novelty and ambiguity to investigate in the world, and the
monitor has only a limited amount of attention, so she has to prioritize
what domains of life to pay attention to, and these domains rank
themselves in order of life importance.18 Sexual arousal draws the
monitor’s focus toward sex, prioritizes sex, only when there aren’t other,
more important things for her to concentrate on, such as survival. And
again, stress is a survival response—escape the lion!—so it
deprioritizes sex for most people. Eﬀectively managing the context—
turning oﬀ the oﬀs—minimizes the things that can draw the little
monitor’s attention away from sex.
A third and ﬁnal skill for coping with a dissatisﬁed monitor is to
reconceptualize sexual desire from a need to the kind of system it really
is: curiosity.
Curiosity (or “Exploration” or “Seeking”) is, like sex, a basic biological
motivational system.19 It fuels our innate desire to investigate noveltyand resolve ambiguity. And curiosity, like sex, is deprioritized when
you’re stressed. If you’re anxious or depressed, you are less curious
about novelty and are more interested in being in a comfortable, familiar
environment.20 This won’t surprise you because you read chapter 3,
and you remember the rat in the ordinary chamber, the spa chamber,

[PDF page 221]

and the Iggy Pop chamber. In a calm state of mind, pretty much
anything will evoke curious, “What’s this?” exploration, while in a
stressed state of mind, almost nothing will.
And like sex, curiosity has no baseline to which you need to return;
instead it has a delightful satisfaction toward which it pulls you. No one
ever died because of not managing to read the end of a mystery novel,
ﬁnd out why grass is green, or experience what it’s like to skydive.
What I like most about curiosity as an analogy for sex is that it means
your partner is not an animal to be hunted for sustenance, but a secret
keeper whose hidden depths are inﬁnite. Sexual boredom can happen
only if you’re no longer curious.21
•  •  •
So sexual desire works like curiosity.
When it works.
Which sometimes it doesn’t.
What causes desire to misbehave, and what do you do when it does?
In the next sections, I’ll talk about the unlikely culprits for desire issues
(hormones and monogamy) and the most likely culprits: brakes-hitting
cultural messages and the relationship issue that I call the chasing
dynamic. And then I’ll talk about three evidence-based strategies for
creating change.
good news! it’s probably not your hormones
If you’re experiencing pain with sex, talk to your medical provider—there
may well be hormonal issues involved, along with a variety of
neurological and physiological factors. But if you’re experiencing low
desire, hormones are the least likely culprits.22 Lori Brotto and hercolleagues tested six hormonal factors to determine which predicted
more or less dysfunction in women with low desire, and not one of them
was signiﬁcantly predictive of low desire.23
So if it’s not your hormones, what has the research found to be
predictive of low desire? According to Brotto, “developmental history,
psychiatric history, and psychosexual history.” In other words, all that
stuﬀ from chapters 4 and 5—stress, depression, anxiety, trauma,
attachment, etc.

[PDF page 222]

People sometimes feel more comfortable with the idea that their
sexual desire has everything to do with their chemistry and nothing to do
with their life. After all, these days it’s easy to change your chemistry!
But hormones are a small—often negligible—part of the context that
shapes a woman’s sexual wellbeing, so changing them can make only a
small—often negligible—impact. This is another reason why the keenly
sought “pink Viagra” is such an unpromising approach. Stress, self-
compassion, trauma history, relationship satisfaction, and other
emotional factors have far more inﬂuence on a woman’s sexual desire
than any hormone.
If you sometimes experience low desire, unless there’s some medical
issue interfering, chances are you don’t have to ﬁx yourself—you’re not
broken—you only have to change your context.
more good news! it’s not monogamy, either
Much has been made in the last several years of the “unnaturalness” of
monogamy and the death of erotic connection when people commit to a
long-term, sexually exclusive relationship. By now you can probably
anticipate my view of the subject: It’s the context that matters, and no
two people are alike. Some monogamous couples create a context that
sustains and enlivens desire, and some couples . . . don’t. It’s not that
monogamy is inherently bad for desire, it’s the way people do
monogamy that can kill desire. If monogamy is your preferred
relationship structure, this section is for you.
There are currently two general schools of thought on strategies for
sustaining desire in long-term monogamous relationships. I’m going to
frame them as the Esther Perel school and the John Gottman school,
though that’s just a shorthand for a much richer and more complex
issue.
In Mating in Captivity, Esther Perel presents a contradiction at the
core of modern relationships: the antithetical pull between the familiar
versus the novel, the stable versus the mysterious. We want love, which
is about security and safety and stability, but we also want passion,
which is about adventure and risk and novelty. Love is having. Desire is
wanting. And you can want only what you don’t already have.
If the problem is that long-term love is antithetical to long-term
passion, then the solution, says Perel, is to maintain autonomy, a space

[PDF page 223]

of eroticism inside yourself, as a way to maintain the distance necessary
to allow wanting to emerge. In terms of that little monitor in your brain,
the solution is to sustain just a little bit of dissatisfaction—not enough to
cross into frustration and certainly not so much that you fall oﬀ the cliﬀ
into the pit of despair, but enough to nourish your curious, “moving-
toward” energy. As Perel puts it in her TEDx talk, “In desire, we want a
bridge to cross.”24 This means intentionally adding distance that creates
an edgy instability or uncertainty, a slight and enjoyable dissatisfaction.
By way of contrast, John Gottman, in The Science of Trust, says that
the problem is not lack of distance and mystery but lack of deepening
intimacy. From this point of view, intimate conversation, aﬀection, and
friendship are central to the erotic life of a long-term relationship.
Gottman reports the ﬁndings of a study of one hundred couples, all age
forty-ﬁve or older, half with good sex lives and half with poor sex lives.
Those who reported that they had good sex lives, he writes,
“consistently mentioned: (1) maintaining a close, connected, and
trusting friendship; and (2) making sex a priority in their lives.”25 In otherwords, sustaining desire isn’t about having a bridge to cross but about
building a bridge together.
“Turn toward each other’s desires,” says Gottman.
“Keep a comfortable distance,” says Perel.
Are you wondering who’s right?
They both are—depending, I think, on how you conceptualize
“desire.” Remember back in chapter 3, the distinction between
eagerness and enjoying? For Perel, desire is eagerness. Wanting.
Seeking. Craving. The discrepancy-reducing pursuit of a goal, to put it in
romantic terms.26
And for Gottman and the couples in the research he cites, desire has
more to do with enjoying. Holding. Savoring. Allowing. Exploring this
moment together, noticing what it is like, and liking it.
If you’ll allow a food metaphor, Perel’s style is about hunger as the
secret sauce that makes a meal delicious. Gottman’s is about arriving
home from work and cooking dinner with your partner, having a glass of
wine while you cook, feeding each other all the strawberries you meant
to keep for dessert, then sitting down together and savoring every
mouthful. In the Perel style, you come to your partner with your ﬁre
already stoked. In the Gottman style, you stoke each other’s ﬁre.
Though both approaches have a lot to oﬀer, our culture generally
values one higher than the other. The Mating in Captivity style of desire

[PDF page 224]

is higher adrenaline; it’s inherently exciting. We relish this kind of
perpetual itch-scratch-relief-itch cycle. We like to want, so much that we
can’t always separate the experience of wanting from the experience of
liking.
The Science of Trust style of desire is lower adrenaline, more a
celebration of sensation in context, a celebration of togetherness. My
personal inclination is more toward Gottman’s style, while my twin sister
said, “Why would closeness ever make anyone want more closeness?
Space! ” I know people who swear by one or the other. I know people
who are too exhausted to try either. I know people who are convinced
that one is the True Way to desire, even though I think they’d beneﬁt by
trying out the other. It’s a matter of ﬁt. And I think that in the end, both
are strategies for accomplishing the same overall goal: increasing
activation of the accelerator and decreasing the brakes.
The goal of both approaches is to sustain curiosity: Perel suggests we
sustain curiosity about our partner as viewed from a distance; Gottman
suggests we sustain curiosity about the very nature of pleasure in the
context of commitment. Both are clear that passion doesn’t happen
automatically in a long-term, monogamous relationship. But they’re also
both clear that passion does happen—as long as the couple takes
deliberate control of the context. And every couple’s needs for context
are unique.
Remember from chapter 4, sex that advances the plot? Sex that
moves you toward a larger goal is powered by more than just the sexual
response mechanism. It’s sex in which your stress and attachment
mechanisms are collaborating with your sexual brakes and accelerator
to increase sexual motivation. Both of these approaches do that, but in
diﬀerent ways.
Following Johnny’s revelation about the dials and switches and
what Laurie is sensitive to, they decided to try one of those box
subscriptions. Every few months, a box would come in the mail—
like a Fruit of the Month thing, only instead of fruit they got kits with
a sort of prefabricated sexy fantasy. They both feared it would be
kind of cheesy, but they also ﬁgured it was worth a try. They were
paying attention to context, and even though Johnny’s context
was, “Give me two minutes to brush my teeth,” Laurie’s was, “Get
me the heck out of mommy mode or I’ll never get to hey-sexy-lady
mode.”

[PDF page 225]

So the box arrived and they opened it together.
Their ﬁrst impression was . . . well, disappointment.
“That was a lot of money for some arts-and-crafts supplies,” was
how Laurie put it.
“We already have a vibrator,” was how Johnny put it.
But they thought, What the hell. We paid for these arts-and-
crafts supplies. We got your mother to babysit. We made a hotel
reservation. Let’s just go, and whatever happens (or not), happens
(or not).
The box included instruction, laying out their evening and some
rules, but they didn’t follow the rules. They talked about it all in the
car on the way to the hotel, laughing the whole time.
They had a pizza delivered and they kept talking about it, and
talking about other things, too—work, kid, family. They just talked
about stuﬀ and remembered how much they like each other. Then
Laurie had a bubble bath, taking a book of erotic stories with her
into the tub.
I’ll fast-forward through the rest of the evening by suggesting you
hum “Can You Feel the Love Tonight?” to yourself for a few
minutes.
At what point in the evening did Laurie start experiencing
something she would describe as actual “desire”? About halfway
through the massage Johnny gave her when she got out of the tub
and strolled to the bed wearing nothing but a lacy bra and
perfumed body lotion.
At what point did Johnny start experiencing desire? In the car on
the way there.
But it worked out just ﬁne.
It was an expensive night, and it required a signiﬁcant amount of
planning ahead, but it got Laurie all the way out of the parenting-
bosslady-student-omg-life state of mind and into a Johnny-and-me-
sexytime state of mind that allowed her stressors to slip into the
shadows of her attention for a while, while hey-sexy-lady stood in
the spotlight.
And all they changed was the context.
“isn’t it just culture?”

[PDF page 226]

I get asked this a lot. “Wouldn’t women experience more spontaneous
desire if our culture weren’t so sex negative?”
Desire is context sensitive, and culture is a part of context, so yes, it
inﬂuences desire. We learned in chapter 5 just how much women have
to overcome when they’re raised in a cultural context that punishes them
for celebrating their own bodies, teaches them to fear or be disgusted by
sex, and leaves them chronically insecure and anxious about
themselves and their partners. It’s a recipe for keeping on the brakes.
So it could easily be true that in a more sex-positive culture, more
women would experience spontaneous desire. In fact, I would bet on it,
since in a more sex-positive culture there would be fewer things to hit
the brakes. And I’d love to see it tested empirically: Let’s raise one
hundred girls in a sex-positive culture that teaches them to celebrate
and trust their own bodies, that prevents all adverse childhood
experience, and that values pleasure, joy, and self-conﬁdence in
women. Let’s see what happens to their sexual wellbeing, compared to
one hundred random girls raised in our regular, body-shaming,
pleasure-shaming, insecure, and coercive sexual culture.
But it’s never “just” culture or “just” biology or “just” anything. It’s
always the interaction of all the variables. Even in a sex-positive culture,
women with more sensitive brakes and less sensitive accelerators would
need extra-sexy stimulation before arousal sparked into desire. And
even in the most intensely sex-negative culture, women with low-
sensitivity brakes and high-sensitivity accelerators would experience
desire before they were even aware of being aroused.27
So yes. Culture is a part of the context, and I think changing the
culture to be more welcoming of sexual variety and autonomy would
allow more women to experience more spontaneous desire.
Alas, culture is not a part of the context that you have a lot of control
over—and I don’t know about you, but I’m not willing to wait until I live in
a sex-positive culture to have the sex life I want. This book is about
activating the science to help you, as an individual, improve your sex
life, and I hope you’ve learned by now that you can have an amazing
sex life right now, without waiting for the culture around you to change.
One little warning here, though: I’ve heard lots of people say, “If we
had a more sex-positive culture, women’s desire would be more like
men’s!” which is the same men-as-default myth that causes women to
feel broken. I think that in a more sex-positive culture, men would be
more like women, too—more responsive, less concordant, more context

[PDF page 227]

sensitive. And whether or not that’s right, let’s make sure we’re not
falling into the trap of assuming that the way men’s sexuality works is
the way women’s is “supposed to.”
Remember the tomatoes and the aloes. Our expectation that people
are supposed to be all one way will only make some people “right” and
other people “wrong,” when there’s nothing wrong that a diﬀerent
context wouldn’t ﬁx—and nothing right that the wrong context couldn’t
break.
it might be the chasing dynamic
“Low desire” is, by deﬁnition, a relationship issue. The partner with low
desire is the one who wants sex too infrequently for the other partner’s
satisfaction. It’s not that one person’s desire for sex is somehow
inherently “too low” or the other’s is “too high.” They’re just diﬀerent—at
least in the current context.
This diﬀerential in desire is the single most common sexual
dysfunction—but it’s not the diﬀerential itself that causes the issue; it’s
how the couple manages it. Problematic dynamics emerge when the
partners have diﬀerent levels of desire and they believe that one
person’s level of desire is “better” than the other person’s. For example,
let’s say Person A has a spontaneous desire style and Person B has a
responsive style. In this scenario, Person A may feel rejected and
undesirable because they almost always do the initiating, and then
Person B may start to feel pushed and will resist more. Person A asks
and asks and asks and feels rejected and hurt and resentful because
Person B keeps saying no, no, no; and Person B feels defensive but
also guilty and hurt because just being asked makes Person B feel like
there must be something wrong. Meanwhile Person A may even start to
wonder, “Am I broken? Do I want sex too much? Am I sexually
obsessed or compulsive?” It’s a mess.
So how do you “ﬁx” it?
We know the answer by now: The problem isn’t the desire itself, it’s
the context. You need more sexually relevant stimuli activating the
accelerator and fewer things hitting the brake.
Here are three ideas that the research suggests will make that
happen.

[PDF page 228]

maximizing desire . . . with science! part 1: arousing the one ring
In season 2 of the Canadian TV series Slings & Arrows, theater director
Geoﬀrey Tennant coaches a pair of young actors struggling to play
Romeo and Juliet. He tells them to run as fast as they can around the
block, chasing each other, then intermittently do push-ups while
breathlessly panting their way through the text of the balcony scene.
“Juliet’s” assessment of how this technique changes her appreciation
for the text: “Wow it’s just . . . passionate, it’s . . . really poetic, but it’s
really, um, sexual, too,” she gasps.
What could aerobic exercise have to do with a pair of teenagers falling
in blazing love with each other?
Arousal.28 Generic heart-thumping, hard-breathing activation of the
central nervous system, because (in part) of the hedonic One Ring of
the brain.
The One Ring, you remember, is about moving toward or moving
away—approach and avoidance, desire or dread. How strongly you
desire or dread something depends on the intensity of the activation in
the One Ring. Because there’s only One Ring to rule all of your
emotional systems, activation of one motivational system can turn up the
volume on activation of another motivation system. And what increases
intensity of activation? The research suggests two kinds of strategies for
building intensity.
Strategy 1: Stuﬀ That Raises Your Heart Rate. Early in a relationship,
go for heart-pumping intensity, like Romeo and Juliet doing push-ups
while they recite their lines. Ride roller coasters, go on long, fast hikes
together through the wilderness, watch scary movies, go to giant
concerts or political rallies. If you’re a nerd like me, talk about science
for hours on end. Do whatever excites you, whatever literally gets your
heart beating faster. You’ll experience general arousal, and your brain
will notice your level of excitement, notice the person you’re with, and
decide, “Hey, I guess this person is really exciting!”
Strategy 2: Meaningful Challenges. To reinforce commitment and
deepen connection, go for novelty and shared, meaningful challenge.29
Play out a lifelong sexual fantasy that you’ve always wanted to try but
haven’t found the courage to explore. Turn on the lights—not to put on a
show but to open your eyes and look at each other’s faces. Connect.
Dive into trust in a big, risky way. Give yourselves, as a couple,
something important to work toward. This is a research-based way to

[PDF page 229]

“advance the plot” in a relationship that is already at the “happily ever
after” phase.
Caveat: Neither of these strategies will work if the brakes are on!
Arousal-oriented strategies are accelerator-activating strategies, but it
doesn’t matter how much you push the accelerator if the brakes are on.
You’ll rev the engine and go nowhere.
So if you’re looking to increase activation of the accelerator, try these
two strategies. But if you need to ﬁnd a way to stop hitting the brakes,
read on.
maximizing desire . . . with science! part 2: turning oﬀ the oﬀs
Take a look at your context worksheets from chapter 3 and then check
out the worksheet at the end of this chapter.
You’ll notice that these worksheets require several things, all of which
research has found help people to bridge the gap between where they
are now and where they want to be.
1. Make a Plan. Be concrete and speciﬁc, not abstract and vague. What precisely will you
do that will help turn oﬀ the brakes? What past experiences do you have that tells you your
strategy could work? When exactly will you connect sexually with yourself or your partner?
Where will you be? What will you have done immediately before, and what will you do
immediately after? What will you wear (or not wear)? Put simply: What sex is worth
having, and what will you do to create it in your life? Concrete. Speciﬁc. Detailed.
2. Anticipate Barriers. A lot of people skip this step, and that’s a mistake. It’s easy to feel
that simply having a plan should be enough. I don’t know if it should be, but I know that it
almost never is, because as soon as you bump into an unanticipated barrier, your whole
plan could collapse in on itself. You might think, “Well, it’s important to me, so I’ll ﬁnd a
way. I’ll just wing it if I hit an obstacle.” Great! I’m glad it’s important. In fact, don’t try it if
it’s not important! And, at the same time, if just “ﬁnding a way” were enough, then you
wouldn’t need to create change in the ﬁrst place, you’d already have found your way.
Anticipate barriers and make contingency plans.30
3. Connect It to Your Identity. Don’t just run, be a runner. Don’t just have sex, be a
deliciously erotic woman who is curious and playful about sex. If you run because you
have to or you feel like you’re supposed to, rather than because it’s part of who you are,
you won’t run very far or very often, and you probably won’t enjoy it much when you do.
And if you have sex because you have to or you feel like you’re supposed to, you won’t

[PDF page 230]

have much sex and you probably won’t enjoy it when you do. Don’t just decide to have
sex, try on the identity of a woman who loves sex.
All three are important for eﬀectively creating change, but if I had to
pick one as the most important, I’d say it’s identity. You can make a
perfect plan—concrete, speciﬁc, detailed, with creative and realistic
strategies for dealing with whatever barriers you may meet—but if it’s
not important to you, you won’t do anything with it. And an eﬃcient way
to make the plan important is to make it central to your identity.
Many women ﬁnd it empowering to try on the identity of “woman who
loves sex.” It feels like ﬁnding the perfect wedding dress or house—it
might need some alterations before it’s exactly right for your life, but you
can feel the connection there. If that’s what it’s like for you, let the
identity guide you as you think through your plan and your anticipated
barriers. “If I were a woman who loved sex, how would I deal with feeling
too busy for sex?” or “As a woman who loves sex, what’s my best
strategy for overcoming self-criticism?”
For other women, the identity of “woman who loves sex” doesn’t feel
right at all—at least, not at ﬁrst. If you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to embody the
identity of a woman who loves sex, that’s crucial information! Think
about what makes that identity feel like such an uncomfortable ﬁt. Are
the “oﬀs” you’re attempting to turn oﬀ tied to your identity? The more
they are, the more your brain and body will hold on to them, not want to
let them go.
Feeling stressed, depressed, anxious, self-critical, untrusting in your
relationship, or simply exhausted and overwhelmed are all real and
meaningful barriers to sex. Remember how the monitor in your
emotional brain prioritizes, based on survival needs. If your answer is
simply, “I’m too damn tired and lonely to be a woman who loves sex,”
that’s a fantastic answer! It means that your fatigue and loneliness are
hitting your brakes—which is normal and makes perfect sense in terms
of context-sensitive or responsive desire—and the way to turn oﬀ your
brakes is to get more rest and ﬁnd more connection with loved ones you
trust. Those are not easy things to do—if they were easy, you’d be doing
them already—but they are important, even without the incentive of
having more and better sex.
Sometimes it comes down to a struggle between diﬀerent identities:
the woman who’s passionate about her job and the woman who’s
passionate about sex. The woman who keeps herself safe by shutting
down and the woman who opens up and takes the risk. The woman who

[PDF page 231]

believes she’s not good enough and beats herself up for it and the
woman who knows she is good enough and gently grants herself
permission to try new things and make mistakes.
There are whole values systems that go with these identities, and the
identity you have now didn’t just appear out of nowhere. But as I
described in chapter 5, a lot of the factors that shaped your sexual self
were not chosen by you. You didn’t choose your garden or what got
planted in it in the early years of your life. Now is the time to evaluate
what you learned and decide what you want to keep and what you want
to replace. And listen: Sometimes you don’t have any control over how
stressful your life is, and when that happens, it’s perfectly rational to let
sex take a backseat. You don’t have to increase your desire for sex. But
you can, if it matters to you.
You can, by turning oﬀ the oﬀs.
Brakes are Merritt’s big challenge, so she tried out “connect it to
your identity.” And the ﬁrst thing that happened is she got really
angry.
“Why should I have to love sex?” she stormed to Carol. “Why
can’t I just be a woman who doesn’t want sex? I’m tired of all the
pressure to want sex more than I do and be a person I’m not!”
So she did a remarkable thing. She made that her identity: “I’m
a woman who doesn’t want sex.” For a while, she made her
identity out of saying no. Angrily.
You’ll remember from chapter 4 that anger is a “ﬁght” stress
response, and that stress responses are cycles that want to
complete. Merritt’s life had aﬀorded plenty of opportunities to start
these cycles but not nearly enough opportunities to complete
them. She would just get angry and then shut herself down, get
angry and shut herself down, hitting the brakes in the middle of the
cycle. So she had a big backlog of incomplete stress response
cycles.
Gloria Steinem said, “The truth will set you free. But ﬁrst it will
piss you oﬀ.” What she didn’t say is how to get from being pissed
oﬀ to being free. The way to do it is to complete the cycle, walk
through the tunnel.
So Merritt let herself experience her anger, because for the ﬁrst
time she was less afraid of the anger itself than of what might

[PDF page 232]

happen to her if she kept the anger locked up inside her forever.
She let it all out.
And she made a fantastic choice about where to put all that
nonspeciﬁc anger: She channeled it into her writing, allowing her
main character to brutally kill an enemy—and she shook and
cried, teeth gritted, while she wrote. She could equally have
channeled it into her morning walk, letting herself get aggressive
with the big hills  .  .  . or she could have channeled it
inappropriately toward her family, taking her nonspeciﬁc anger and
trying to make it speciﬁcally about them, using her anger as a
weapon against others. But she’s smarter than that. She made
writing her outlet.
And the anger did what anger does when you allow it to blow
through you like a strong wind: It blew itself out. It took some time,
and it was uncomfortable. She had multiple decades of
accumulated stuﬀ to ﬁnish, and even a couple weeks of “no!” was
just a beginning. But what mattered most was that she had given
herself permission to feel the anger and was learning the skill of
allowing it to move through her, rather than holding on to it. She
didn’t do anything with it, she didn’t direct it toward anyone, she
just released it into the world, she just allowed it. Merritt trusted
her body to release all that pent-up rage. She visualized it settling
into the hole in the ozone layer.
Then one day, her anger blew itself into quietness, and into that
silence she could ask herself, “So if I don’t want sex, what do I
want?”
She remembered the lube night, how good it felt to give
pleasure, and the answers came fast and furious. She wanted to
give pleasure, to connect, to receive pleasure and share it with the
love of her life. To experience pleasure—all kinds of pleasure, but
the pleasures of her own body especially—without the defenses
that had kept her safe in an unsafe world.
It wasn’t that she had never before had pleasure in her life, but it
was so walled up by her self-protection that it couldn’t expand
beyond a small imprisoned domain within her.
When she focused on her partner’s pleasure, her brakes weren’t
activated. She knew that much. How was she going to let go and
experience pleasure for herself?
Orgasm.

[PDF page 233]

But that’s chapter 8.
maximizing desire . . . with science! part 3: desperate measures
If you and your partner are locked into the chasing dynamic and things
have escalated so far that none of the strategies I’ve just described
sound helpful, therapy is probably a good option for you. In particular, if
either partner is experiencing dread when wanting to experience desire,
therapy may be your best strategy. Dread, after all, is what happens
when expecting combines with eagerness . . . but it’s eagerness to
move away, rather than toward. When the context is wrong, you’re like
the rat hearing Iggy Pop; almost any stimulation is met with “What the
hell is this?”, so it hardly matters what you do—everything feels like a
bad idea. When you’re stuck in that mode: therapy. It is genuinely
eﬀective, when the relationship is sound!
If you’d like to try a therapy-like approach on your own, you can adapt
the following ideas in whatever way suits your relationship. Here’s the
basic structure.
1. No Sex. That means no genital contact and no orgasms for, say, a month—or two
weeks, or three months. Long enough to feel like a substantial barrier. The purpose of this
is to remove every trace of expectation or demand that sex will be the result of any
physical contact between you. There might be other things you put oﬀ-limits, too—
anything that the lower-desire Partner B resists because of feeling pushed. Without the
dread of, “Ugh, what if this perfectly pleasant kiss turns into an expectation of sex that I
still don’t want?” both of you can relax and enjoy the physical intimacy you do share.
2. Alternate Initiation. Each person initiates at least once a week. Or once every other
week if that seems like too much. Or three times a week if it seems like too little. The
number doesn’t matter much, just negotiate a number that both of you feel is doable. The
function of this rule is to break down the chasing dynamic so that neither feels pressured
and neither feels deprived.
Since you have the no-sex rule, what you’re initiating isn’t sex, but rather sensual
touching (see the stages below for details). No demand, no expectations, no
pressure to “perform.” Just touching and pleasure and aﬀectionate awareness of
bodies. At some point during the day or else right when you go to bed, one partner
indicates that they are initiating sensual touching—verbally, nonverbally, whatever
works. Find at least twenty minutes of uninterrupted time when you can focus on

[PDF page 234]

each other and be attentive and present, without distractions. If initiation happens at
an inconvenient time, negotiate a better one and do it then.
A standard approach to sex therapy is to progress along stages. You spend a
week or two at each stage, alternating who initiates the gradually escalating sensual
touching. Like this:
Stage 1. One person touches the other (excluding body parts that underwear
covers) for the toucher’s pleasure, and then they switch.
Stage 2. One person touches the other (excluding body parts that underwear
covers) for their own and their partner’s pleasure, and then they switch.
Stage 3. One person touches the other, now including genitals and breasts, for both
partners’ pleasure, and then they switch.
Stage 4. Simultaneous touching for mutual pleasure.
And then penetration, if that’s a thing that happens in your
relationship, ﬁrst without any thrusting (“vaginal containment”) and then,
in the ﬁnal stage, with thrusting but without orgasm. But you don’t have
to follow this series of stages. You can negotiate a variation that works
for both of you.
The person doing the touching must practice “self-assertion” and the
person being touched must practice “self-protection.” That is, in the ﬁrst
stage especially, the toucher must do what feels good, and the touchee
must say when the toucher should stop doing something that feels
uncomfortable. Some couples ﬁnd it useful to use a scale, like –10 to
+10, and the toucher stops doing anything below a –2. Some couples
use a traﬃc light system—green light for pleasure, yellow for neutral, and
red for “Stop that.” The purpose of self-protection and self-assertion is
to untangle the knots in sexual communication by simplifying it down to
“This feels good to me” and “I don’t like that,” without blame or
judgment.
As you can imagine, Feels emerge in this process, Lots of Feels. The
real challenge with this strategy is not the stages or alternating initiation,
but creating space for both people’s Feels, even when they conﬂict with
each other. If you’re good at creating that space as a couple, this
approach could be really terriﬁc for you. If you are too stuck in your own
points of view to take each other’s points of view seriously . . . therapy.
Really. It helps! The research says so!31
•  •  •

[PDF page 235]

The larger solution underpinning all three of these approaches is
attitudinal rather than behavioral. Feeling like there’s something wrong
with you (or with your partner) or feeling like your partner feels there’s
something wrong with you—these are desire killers, every time.
So look, I’ve got a message for Partner B, the one who feels chased.
I’m going to say something, and you’re going to believe me because all
the scientiﬁc evidence is on my side. Actually, you’ll believe me because
what I’m about to say is true. Because in the patient corners of your
heart, you’ve always known it’s true. It’s this:
You’re not broken. You are whole. And there is hope.
You might feel stuck. You might be exhausted. You feel depressed,
anxious, worn out by the demands of taking care of everyone else, and
in desperate, dire need of renewal. You might be tired of feeling like you
need to defend yourself and tired of wishing your body would do
something diﬀerent. You might wish that, for a little while, someone else
would defend you so that you could lower your guard and just be. Just
for a while.
Those are circumstances, they’re not you. You are okay. You are
whole. There exists inside you a sexuality that protects you by
withdrawing until times are propitious.
I completely get how terribly frustrating it can be that your partner’s
body feels like times are propitious right now, while your body is still
wary. And it’s even worse because the more ready your partner’s body
seems, the more wary your body becomes. It sucks, for both of you.
But it’s in there, your sexuality. It’s part of you, as much as your skin
and your heartbeat and your vocabulary. It’s there. It’s waiting. Just
because you’ve had no call to use the words “calefacient” or “perfervid”
lately doesn’t mean they’re no longer available to you. If the opportunity
arises, there they will be, ready, waiting. Like your best friend, your
sexual desire is waiting for your life to allow it to come out and play. Let
it, whenever it feels safe enough.
And a brief message to Partner A—the one who wants sex and keeps
asking for it: I know that it can feel like Partner B is withholding and I
know that that can feel deeply awful. Your role in untangling your
relationship knots is very diﬃcult because it requires you to put down
your hurts and be loving to the person who, it sometimes seems, is the
source of those hurts. Boy, is that hard.
I know, too, that sometimes you may start to worry that you want sex
too often, that you’re making unreasonable demands or that you’re sick

[PDF page 236]

to want sex as much as you do. No, you just have a higher level of
sexual interest than your partner does—your parts are organized in a
diﬀerent way. It’s normal. Neither of you is broken, you just need to
collaborate to ﬁnd a context that works for both of you.
Give Partner B space and time away from sex. Let sex drop away
from your relationship—for a little while—and be there, fully present,
emotionally and physically. Lavish your partner with aﬀection, on the
understanding that aﬀection is not a preamble to sex. Be warm and
generous with your love. You won’t run out.
Put simply, the best way to deal with diﬀerential desire is: Be kind to
each other.
Untangling the knots of sexual dynamics in a relationship takes time,
patience, and practice, but consistently using these strategies, which
are based in the best available science, can put you on the right track.
sharing your garden
Just as women are often taught to trust cultural messages about their
body more than their own internal sense of what’s healthy, we often trust
our partner’s opinions and ideas about our sexuality more than we trust
our own. Especially if our partner’s sexuality is a better match with the
standard narrative about how sex is “supposed” to work, we’re ready to
believe that we’re broken.
But you know better now, and you know how to make the most of any
desire style. Embrace responsive desire. Adore it. It asks that your
partner help you in creating good reasons for you to be turned on.
When you welcome someone new into your garden, remember, that
person is used to working in their own garden, and that garden is
diﬀerent from yours. That person’s body, brakes and accelerator, the
seeds that their family and culture planted, the way that person was
taught to tend the garden, all may be similar to yours . . . or they may be
totally diﬀerent. If you and your partner are diﬀerent from each other,
remember that neither of you is better or worse—even if one of you
conforms more to the cultural standard. A potato farmer would be plain
old wrong to suggest that your roses should be growing underground.
What works for aloe won’t work for tomatoes.
I hope that anyone you like and respect enough to invite into your
garden likes and respects you, too. Just as you want to help the other

[PDF page 237]

person’s garden thrive, so the other person wants to help your garden
thrive. They just might not know how to do it.
So you have to teach your partner about responsive desire. You’re not
broken, you’re a tomato plant in a world that expects you to be an aloe.
If you thrive on more water, tell your partner, and celebrate it together.
Say what contexts activate your accelerator, turn you on, and say what
contexts hit your brakes, shut you oﬀ. Talk about the sexiest sex you’ve
had together and what your partner can do to make it happen again.
Good things happen when you create space in your relationship
for responsive desire. When Olivia and Patrick ﬂipped their desire
styles on their heads by making Patrick, with his context-sensitive
desire style, the initiator, he had to ﬁgure out what exciting things
would propel him from idling to interested. Olivia patiently allowed
Patrick space and time to explore his desire, and she was
rewarded with an intensity of erotic experience that her own
spontaneous style rarely allowed for.
This level of mutual acceptance and self-acceptance is itself a
speciﬁc and vital characteristic of the most exuberantly sex-
positive context. It requires not simply being aware of how each
person’s sexuality works, but also accepting and welcoming those
sexualities, just as they are. It’s not how your sexuality works that
matters; it’s how you feel about your sexuality. How your partner
feels about theirs. And how you both feel about each other’s.
That right there is the ultimate sex-positive context. And it’s what
chapter 9 is about.
But before we get there, how about we talk about orgasm?
tl;dr
• About 15 percent of women have a spontaneous desire style—they want sex out of the
blue. Thirty percent experience responsive desire—they want sex only when something
pretty erotic is already happening. The rest, about half of women, experience some
combination of the two, depending on context.
• Sex is not a drive, like hunger. It’s an “incentive motivation system,” like curiosity. So . . .
stay curious.

[PDF page 238]

• When sex feels like a drive, it’s because of the little monitor in your emotional brain,
whose job is to reduce discrepancies. The monitor motivates you to pursue novelty,
pleasure, ambiguity, etc.
• To increase sexual desire in a relationship, increase novelty, pleasure, ambiguity, and
intensity (increase your heart rate!). See the worksheet on this page to ﬁnd out how.
turning oﬀ the oﬀs
This worksheet is designed to help you create a practical plan for
turning oﬀ the oﬀs. The research suggests it’s most eﬀective when you
repeat the four steps each day, but you can try doing it weekly, and even
going through the exercise once would be great.
Step 1: Review your Sexy and Not-So-Sexy Contexts worksheets from
chapter 3, where you identiﬁed the contexts that hit your brakes and
activate your accelerator. Write a summary here:
Brakes Accelerator
Step 2: All these brakes-hitting and accelerating-hitting contexts are
your potential targets for change. Choose one that you could change if
you decided to try turning oﬀ the oﬀs. List ﬁve things you and/or your
partner could take to implement this strategy. Hint: The more concrete
and speciﬁc you are, the more useful this will be.
1.
 

[PDF page 239]

2.
 
3.
 
4.
 
5.
 
Step 3: Anticipate barriers. What obstacles might you encounter?
Where and when—speciﬁcally—will this obstacle occur?
What could you do to prevent these obstacles?
What—speciﬁcally—will you do to get back to the goal if you face these
obstacles?
Step 4: Think about what it would feel like to be a warm and erotic
woman who is curious and playful about sex. What is it like? What else
is true?
Some questions to consider:

[PDF page 240]

• What strategies would you use to create more time for sex?
• What would give you more energy for sex?
• What aspects of your relationship would enhance sex?
• What challenges in your relationship would you like to overcome?
• What would your relationship with your body be like?
• How would you initiate sex?
• How would you respond when your partner initiated?
• What sexual cues would you notice?
• What kinds of thoughts would you have about sex?
• How do you feel about your partner’s sexual arousal, desire, and orgasm?
• How would you feel about your own desire, arousal, and orgasm?
• How would you feel about giving pleasure?
• How would you feel about receiving pleasure?
• How would you manage the cultural shaming that some people would try to impose on
you for being empowered and in control of your own body?
• What would be your favorite thing about your sexuality?
Examples:
• I can lose myself in my partner’s touch and experience pleasure in the moment, without
worrying about orgasm.
• I would think about the sexy and romantic interludes I’ve shared with my partner and let
that build up my desire.
• I want sex even if we’re arguing.
• All the doors and windows are open on my sexuality—I’m a big exuberant YES.
• I won’t let anything get in the way of pleasure.
• I would allow myself to want what I want and not judge it.
• Exploring my sexuality is more exciting than scary.
• I would turn to sex and pleasure in times of distress.
• Sex isn’t separate from the rest of my life—it’s a part of my life, and my life is a part of it.
• There’s no pressure to be or do anything that isn’t 100 percent of what feels right to me.

[PDF page 241]

part 4
ecstasy for everybody

[PDF page 242]

eight
orgasm
THE FANTASTIC BONUS
Spectatoring is the art of worrying about your body and your
sexual functioning while you’re having sex, and Merritt was a
master practitioner. Rather than paying attention to the pleasant,
tingly things going on in her body, her head would ﬁll with anxious
thoughts about how her breasts were moving or how she didn’t
have an orgasm the last time they had sex or what her inability to
focus on pleasure meant about her as a sexual person. She
worried about the sex she was having, instead of enjoying the sex
she was having. And worry is the opposite of arousal. Worry hit
her brakes.
And when the brakes are on, orgasm doesn’t happen.
Which is why she could easily count the number of orgasms she
had had with Carol in their two decades together.
And which also is why she decided that orgasm was the perfect
way to practice the pleasure—and the trust in herself that pleasure
required—that she wanted to build in her life.
“Okay so tell me how,” she said to me. “How do I make orgasm
happen?”
“Ah, you don’t make orgasm happen. You allow it,” I said.
She nodded—then shook her head. “I don’t know what that
means.”
I recommended she read Becoming Orgasmic by Julia Heiman
and Joseph LoPiccolo. Although it’s written for women who’ve
never had an orgasm, it’s really the quintessential guide for all
women who struggle with it. Merritt got the book, read it, and did
some exercises . . . and then she did another remarkable thing.
She decided not to try to have orgasms with Carol after all.

[PDF page 243]

“For me, having sex until I have an orgasm would be like
running until I lose weight. It just doesn’t work that way. So I’m
going to stop trying.”
Once a week, she and Carol traded massages and kisses and
oral sex. They just played, and they paid attention to how it felt,
and they weren’t goal directed at all.
And guess what happened.
Yup.
This chapter is about orgasm, the full range of orgasmic
experience available to women and the barriers that stand
between women and ecstatic pleasure. Merritt’s sensitive brakes
made orgasm—especially orgasm with another person—elusive.
She used the science I describe in this chapter to turn oﬀ the oﬀs
and ﬁnd her way to a more profound experience of orgasm than
she thought she would ever experience.
Several years ago I supported a friend as she began her ﬁrst sexual
relationship, having never so much as masturbated in her life, much less
had an orgasm. She asked me questions from time to time, and one of
them was, “How do I know when I’ve had an orgasm?”
I told her that orgasms feel diﬀerent to everyone and that orgasms can
vary from each other, depending on the mode of stimulation, whether
you have a partner with you, maybe even where you are in your
menstrual cycle—any number of factors. Sometimes women feel a
rhythmic pulsing of the muscle around their vagina, sometimes not. The
main thing most women describe most of the time is a sense of
“doneness,” a sense that you’ve crossed a threshold and something has
completed. There’s often a peak of tension where your muscles tighten
and your heart pounds. Orgasms are kind of like art, I told her. You
know it when you see it. It may not be what you expect, but it will be
diﬀerent from everything else.
She nodded eagerly and said, “I think I had that!”
And then one day she walked up to me, grinning from ear to ear, and
said, “It wasn’t what I expected, but you were right. It was
unmistakable.”
This great variety and variability makes orgasm almost impossible to
deﬁne—though scientists spend thousands of words puzzling over it.
But when you strip it down to the universal essentials, here’s what you
get: Orgasm is the sudden, involuntary release of sexual tension.1

[PDF page 244]

Notice how much is missing from that deﬁnition: genitals, muscle
contractions, sexual behavior, pleasure, or indeed anything that
speciﬁes what it feels like or how it happened. Orgasms vary—from
woman to woman, and from context to context. They happen while
you’re making love—and sometimes they don’t. They happen while
you’re masturbating—and sometimes they don’t. They can happen from
clitoral stimulation, vaginal stimulation, thigh stimulation, anal
stimulation, breast stimulation, earlobe stimulation, or mental stimulation
with no physical contact at all—or not during any of these. They can
happen while you’re asleep, while you’re exercising, or while you’re in a
variety of other completely nonsexual situations. They can be delightful,
humdrum, spiritual, annoying, ecstatic, fun, or frustrating. Sometimes
they’re awesome. Sometimes they’re not. Sometimes you want them.
Sometimes you don’t.
In this chapter, we’re on a quest to explore the entire landscape of
orgasmic experience, so that we can ﬁnd our way to the secret garden
at the center of it all. To begin, I’ll tell you what orgasm is not: It is not a
genital response, “pleasure,” hierarchical, or an evolutionary adaptation.
I’ll roll out a red carpet of statistics and a cheering crowd of women’s
stories, to normalize your experience (or lack thereof) of orgasm. Then
I’ll describe what it takes to overcome diﬃculty with orgasm, whether it’s
learning to have that ﬁrst orgasm or learning to orgasm in diﬀerent
contexts. And I’ll tell you how to ﬁnd inside yourself the kind of orgasm
that makes the stars explode into rainbows.
I want to prove to you that whatever your orgasms are (or aren’t) like
is normal, and I want to empower you to have the most profound and
intense orgasms you’re capable of, orgasms that turn the universe
inside out. It’s possible for everyone, I believe, but only when you let go
of all the things orgasm isn’t.
What to Do if You Find Yourself Spectatoring
Humans, unlike all other species, can be in control of their brains, rather than their brains
being in control of them. We can notice what we’re thinking or feeling, and we can do
something about it. That’s the key to managing any form of performance anxiety, including
spectatoring: Notice what you’re paying attention to, and then shift your attention to the
thing you want to pay attention to.
This is easier said than done at ﬁrst, but with practice it becomes easier done than
said! Here’s how:

[PDF page 245]

Suppose you’re standing in line at the grocery store or sitting on the bus. Let yourself
notice your breathing. In. Pause. Out. Pause. In. Pause. Out. Pause. Two breaths, just like
that. Notice, and smile. Notice ﬁve to ten times a day.
And notice, above all, when your attention wanders during those two breaths—which it
will, that’s normal. When you notice your mind wandering, smile at those other thoughts,
let them go, and gently return your attention to where you want it to be. That skill right
there? That’s mindfulness. Noticing when your attention wanders from the thing you’re
trying to notice is the skill that will help you stop spectatoring, because you’ll learn to
notice the spectatoring and to redirect your attention to the sensations in your body.
nonconcordance—now with orgasms!
The ﬁrst thing orgasm isn’t is a genital response.
In chapter 2, I described Masters and Johnson’s research measuring
the physiology of the sexual response cycle. There were certain cues
that the research used to mark when orgasm happened, particularly
contractions of the pelvic ﬂoor muscle at the entrance of the vagina.
Yeah. It’s not that simple.
Remember nonconcordance from chapter 6—what your genitals are
doing doesn’t necessarily match what you’re experiencing? There’s
evidence that this is true for orgasm as well—at least among women
who are able to orgasm in a laboratory while their genital response is
being measured.
For example, in one study, research participants were asked to
masturbate to orgasm in the lab and then “grade” their orgasm on a
scale of 1 (“weak or poor”) to 5 (“most powerful or excellent”).2 Result?
There was no relationship between the grades women gave their
orgasms and the genital responses traditionally treated as “markers” of
orgasm, such as number of contractions of the pelvic ﬂoor muscle.
Those rhythmic, involuntary contractions are perhaps the most nearly
universal physiological marker of orgasm—but even that can’t be relied
on all the time. In one study, two out of eleven women exhibited no
vaginal muscle contractions at orgasm.3 And in another study, some
women exhibited the muscle contractions without orgasm.4
In other words, genital physiological markers of orgasm are not
always predictive of a woman’s subjective experience of orgasm. Which
makes perfect sense if you recognize that orgasm—like arousal—isn’t

[PDF page 246]

about what happens in your genitals, it’s about what happens in your
brain.5
no two alike
Which brings us to the second thing orgasm isn’t: “a pinnacle of
pleasure.”
Orgasm is a lot like being tickled. Sometimes it can be fun, other
times it’s annoying, and sometimes it feels like almost nothing. Pleasure
is a perception of a sensation, and perception is context dependent.
That’s just as true for orgasm as it is for tickling. But no one ever asks
me, “Why is it that a lot of the time when my partner tickles me it feels
fun and pleasurable, but then other times it really doesn’t?” We all know
intuitively that the perception of tickling sensations is context dependent.
There’s a time and a place for tickling.
And yet people ask me all the time, “How come sometimes my
orgasms are great and other times they’re really not?” It’s as if we
believe that orgasms are somehow diﬀerent from other sensations, that
they should feel a certain way, no matter the context.
All orgasms are the sudden release of sexual tension. How that
release feels depends on context. Which is why some orgasms feel
amazing and others . . . really, really don’t. A handful of examples:
• A woman told me, red faced, that she had an orgasm during her exercise class—but she
didn’t enjoy it—and was confused both by the orgasm and the lack of pleasure.6
• A friend with major depression said she could have orgasms but she didn’t experience
pleasure with them. I told her that was normal, that pleasure comes from context, and her
context was gray and ﬂat. Normal for a person with depression.
• An undergrad was turning paler and paler during my guest lecture about sexual assault. I
had mentioned in passing that sometimes women have orgasms during rape and that
that’s basically just a reﬂex, it doesn’t mean pleasure or consent.7 She came up to me
afterward and said I’d changed her life with that one sentence.
• A woman periodically orgasmed in her sleep and would wake up midorgasm, sometimes
from a dream, sometimes not, but always puzzled by the warmth and pulsing that were not
necessarily accompanied by any particular enjoyment.8
Orgasms diﬀer from each other because the context for those
orgasms diﬀers. The quality of an orgasm is a function not of orgasm

[PDF page 247]

itself but of the context in which it happens.
all the same parts . . .
The third thing orgasm isn’t: hierarchical. All orgasms are diﬀerent, and
there is no “right” kind or “better” kind of orgasm. It’s even hard to say
that there are diﬀerent kinds of orgasm—because they’re all made of the
same basic parts (sudden release of sexual tension) organized in
diﬀerent ways.
Instead of thinking about “kinds” of orgasm, we can think about
diﬀerent ways to have an orgasm. Here’s a small sample of the highly
pleasurable orgasms women have described to me:
• Orgasm from clitoral stimulation.
• Orgasm from vaginal stimulation.
• Orgasm just from breast stimulation.
• Orgasm from having her toes sucked.
• Orgasm when her partner penetrated her (well-lubricated) anus with a ﬁnger, while
pinning her to the bed by her hair. The most erotic sensation, she speciﬁed, was his warm
palm resting gently on her butt cheeks.
• Orgasm when her partner slowly and gently stroked ﬁngertips upward along her outer
labia . . . again . . . and again . . . and again. She said, “What started out as an appetizer
turned into the main course.”
• Orgasm without any genital stimulation, while she was giving her partner oral sex. She
was so closely tuned to his arousal that when he came, she did, too.
Are these clitoral orgasms, vaginal orgasms, breast orgasms, toe
orgasms, butt cheek orgasms, labia orgasms, and oral orgasms?
Nope. Despite the painstaking eﬀorts of women’s magazines and
even researchers to identify and label the various kinds of orgasms we
could be having—G-spot orgasms, blended orgasms, uterine orgasms,
vulval, and all the rest9—there can be only one. (Like The Highlander.)
There’s just the sudden release of sexual tension, generated in diﬀerent
ways. Anatomically, physiologically, even evolutionarily, it doesn’t make
much sense to talk about kinds of orgasms based on what body parts
are stimulated.10
It’s true that orgasms generated through clitoral stimulation often feel
diﬀerent from orgasms generated through vaginal stimulation. But it’s

[PDF page 248]

also true that vaginally stimulated orgasms feel diﬀerent from each
other, and clitorally stimulated orgasms feel diﬀerent from each other.
Orgasms with a partner may feel diﬀerent from orgasms without a
partner, and orgasms with one particular partner may feel diﬀerent from
orgasms with a diﬀerent partner, and orgasms with one partner may feel
diﬀerent from sexual encounter to sexual encounter. If we were going to
categorize orgasms by how they feel, we’d need a new category for
every orgasm a woman has.
Just as all vulvas are normal and healthy just as they are, so all
orgasms are normal and healthy, regardless of what kind of stimulation
generated them or how they feel. Their value comes not from how it
came to be or whether it meets some arbitrary criteria but from whether
you liked it and wanted it.
Orgasms were not Laurie’s problem. Once she got going, she
found orgasm pretty reliable. No, Laurie’s problem was that the
stress in her life built a stone wall between her and sexual
pleasure of any kind. She and Johnny were learning how to break
down that wall by changing the context . . . but following their “Can
You Feel the Love Tonight?” success, Johnny got cocky. He
pushed his luck. He started asking and pressing and chasing,
which made Laurie feel more and more pressured, and soon she
started to resent that he was asking, especially since he knew—he
knew—that when she felt pressured, her interest evaporated. It
was like he was trying to ruin it.
A perfectly normal and very tempting way for Laurie to think
about this situation would have been to say, “Look, my life is out of
whack, therefore my sexual interest is out of whack. So be it. No
sex for me.” Plenty of women think the same thing every day and
are rightly satisﬁed to wait until their lives improve before they try
to get their sex lives back into whack. It’s a matter of priorities.
And in fact, the main reason Laurie kept trying to want sex more
was not that she really wanted to want sex, but that Johnny
wanted her to want it.
In frustration, she booted him out of the house for the day, sent
him with Trevor to the library so that she could have the luxury of
the house to herself, to do laundry, get some work done, and
maybe, if she was really lucky, take a nap.
And once they were gone . . . she missed them.

[PDF page 249]

Often the best part of her day was her son’s bath time—far from
being an exhausting chore or a hassle, she loved to splash and
play with him. And now she found herself looking forward to their
return, because . . . bath time!
And then she compared her feeling about sexy-pleasure to her
feeling about mommy-pleasure. She thought, “It’s not selﬁsh of me
to enjoy being with my kid—enjoying it makes me a better parent!
So how come I can give myself permission to have that pleasure,
but I can’t give myself permission to enjoy other kinds of
pleasure?”
Something clicked. She had all kinds of insights about having
been taught that being a mom was the best thing about being a
woman but having sex wasn’t okay, that the pleasure of delicious
food was blocked by guilt about her body . . . lots of things. But in
the end, something just clicked, and she let go of a bunch of stuﬀ.
She started wondering if maybe sex could be for pleasure, rather
than something “for Johnny.”
Laurie remembered Johnny saying, “Maybe it’s about what it
feels like, not about where we are or what we’re doing.” Maybe
she could try that, try paying attention to what it feels like,
regardless of what’s going on.
your vagina’s okay, either way
I get asked a lot about orgasm during penile-vaginal intercourse, so let’s
spend a little time with that. As we saw in chapter 1, the clitoris is Grand
Central Station for erotic sensation. The dominance of the clitoris in
women’s orgasms explains why 80–90 percent of women who
masturbate typically do so with little or no vaginal penetration, including
when they use vibrators.11
But ya know, there’s this old saying: “It ain’t the size of the boat, it’s
the motion of the ocean.”
The wisdom this attempts to convey is that it’s not the size of the
penis penetrating the vagina, it is the collaborative stimulation between
partners (or possibly the skill of one or the other of the “sailors”) that
creates pleasure and orgasm for a woman during intercourse.
The fact is, it’s not the size of the boat, and it’s not the motion of the
ocean either. Women just vary. Despite what you’ve learned from

[PDF page 250]

movies, romance novels, or porn, in reality less than a third of women
are reliably orgasmic with vaginal penetration alone, while the remaining
two-thirds are sometimes, rarely, or never orgasmic with penetration
alone.12
Yet women ask me all the time, “Why can’t I have an orgasm during
intercourse?” The reason they can’t is very likely the same reason most
women can’t: Intercourse is not a very eﬀective way to stimulate the
clitoris, and clitoral stimulation is the most common way to make an
orgasm happen. In fact, a likely reason why women vary in how reliably
they orgasm with penetration is the distance between the clitoris and the
urethra.13 It’s essentially a matter of anatomical engineering.So the question is not so much why some women aren’t orgasmic
from vaginal penetration, as it is why are some women? There are
several hypotheses, but probably the two best contenders are: (a)
stimulation through the front wall of the vagina of the urethral sponge
(the female homologue of the prostate and the original hypothesized
source of the G-spot); or (b) the vestibular bulbs, extending down to the
mouth of the vagina from the head of the clitoris. But in the end, the
answer is: People vary.14 People vary in the layout of their genitals and
the sensitivity of the tissue. My guess is that both of these hypotheses
have merit, but you can imagine how challenging it is to get funding to
do research on women’s orgasm, so it may be a while before we know
for sure.
Now, if penetrative orgasms are comparatively uncommon, why do
women ask about it so often? Why is it so often viewed as “the right way
to orgasm”?
And the answer is, of course, “Ugh, patriarchy.” Men-as-default
again. Centuries of male doctors and scientists—Freud is often pointed
to as a key oﬀender here, and rightly so—claimed that orgasms from
vaginal stimulation are the right, good, normal kind, and clitoral orgasms
are “immature.”
But it’s men-as-default in a diﬀerent way from how it worked with
arousal and desire. Culture sanctions spontaneous desire as the
“expected” kind of desire because that’s how men experience desire,
and culture sanctions concordant arousal as the expected kind of
arousal because that’s how men experience arousal . . . but if women’s
expected kind of orgasm is whatever men experience, then that should
be clitoral stimulation, since anatomically the clitoris is the homologue of
the penis. To say that women should have orgasms from vaginal

[PDF page 251]

penetration is anatomically equivalent to saying that men should have
orgasms from prostate or perineal stimulation.
Certainly many men can orgasm from that kind of stimulation,15 but
we don’t judge them if they don’t, and they don’t usually wonder if
they’re broken if they don’t.
So apparently, according to cultural myth, women should be just like
men—with concordant arousal and spontaneous desire—right up until
we actually start having intercourse, and then we’re supposed to
function in an exclusively female way, orgasming from a behavior that
also happens to get men oﬀ very reliably. Men’s pleasure is the default
pleasure.
But it’s not just men-as-default—if it were only about male pleasure,
then women might be expected to orgasm while giving a male partner a
hand job or oral sex, as much as we’re expected to orgasm during
intercourse. No, there’s a speciﬁc, special expectation around orgasm
with intercourse.
the evolution of the fantastic bonus
So why, apart from men-as-default, is orgasm from intercourse the
expected kind? And, while we’re at it, why do women vary so much in
what kind of stimulation gives them orgasms?
The answer to both questions is, for diﬀerent reasons . . . evolution!
Throw your mind way back to chapter 1, where I described our
tendency to metaphorize biology—like how anatomists called a
woman’s genitals “shameful” because you can’t see them when she
stands up. Nowhere in science is this metaphorization tendency more
pervasive, more insidious, or more misleading than in the science of the
evolution of women’s sexuality. Boy howdy, do we get it wrong—not so
much because the science is wrong (though it has been!), but because
we tend to interpret the science through cultural lenses, from the point of
view of what we already expect, want, or like from women’s sexuality.
And what a men-as-default, puritanical culture expects, wants, and
likes is pleasure for men and babies for women. For centuries, scientists
assumed that if orgasm during vaginal intercourse is how men make
babies, then orgasm during vaginal intercourse must be how women
make babies, too. As I mentioned in chapter 6, women’s orgasm was
even believed to be a sign of conception.

[PDF page 252]

So that’s why orgasm during intercourse is such a big deal: women’s
sexuality as Men’s Sexuality Lite.
But.
In The Case of the Female Orgasm: Bias in the Science of Evolution,
a book perhaps best described as “relentlessly precise,” feminist
philosopher of science Elisabeth Lloyd analyzed forty years of research
and more than twenty theories about why women have orgasms.16 She
concluded that the theory best supported by the available evidence is
that women’s orgasm is not an evolutionary adaptation. Women’s
orgasm has no relationship to reproductive success, it doesn’t promote
egg fertilization or prevent miscarriage, it doesn’t even “suck” sperm
into the uterus—in fact, it turns out sperm is transported most eﬃciently
through a completely unstimulated uterus!17
Instead, women’s orgasms exist as a byproduct—a result of the fact
that male and female genitals develop homologously (remember from
chapter 1?). Male ejaculation, with its close tie to orgasm, is crucial to
reproduction, so orgasm is embedded in male sexual hardware in the
brain and genitals. As a result, orgasm is embedded in female sexual
hardware, too, because: homology.
Women’s orgasms are, in this way, rather like the hymen. We make a
really big deal out of them, culturally—both pro and con—but
evolutionarily they’re more or less an afterthought. Both orgasms and
hymens are all diﬀerent from each other because the variety doesn’t
aﬀect reproductive success.
In other words, women can have orgasms for the same reason men
have nipples.
My students often hate this idea. They are not intuitively comfortable
with the idea that men’s orgasms are evolutionarily crucial and women’s
orgasms are just a side eﬀect. It feels Adam’s rib-y, as if the hypothesis
is saying women’s orgasms aren’t important. And there are deep
historical realities behind that feeling; somewhere in the three hundred
years between ﬁguring out that female orgasm isn’t necessary for
conception and ﬁguring out female orgasm isn’t an evolutionary
adaptation, scientists began saying things about how female orgasm
and the clitoris were “of no utility.”18 Vestigial, like the appendix. So if
the phrase “not an adaptation” sounds to you like “not important,”
well . . . yeah. That could easily be what science used to think.
What can I say? Science is made of people, and people can be
stupid.

[PDF page 253]

Fortunately, the scientiﬁc method is speciﬁcally designed to help us
overcome our stupid! And so science is moving forward, and the rest of
us should move with it. In the twenty-ﬁrst century, only some kind of
woman-hating asshat would think that just because it doesn’t help make
babies, women’s orgasm isn’t important. Lloyd, only half kidding,
suggests we call the byproduct hypothesis the “fantastic bonus” account
of women’s orgasm. As in, you don’t have to have orgasms. You may, if
you like—they are available to most every woman—but you get to
choose! You can have orgasms if you want! Because: pleasure!
Hooray!
Women’s orgasms are important because women’s sexual wellbeing
is important, and orgasm is part of that for a lot of women. Not everyone
is passionate about them, and that’s cool, too. Women vary, and we’re
all normal.
Camilla, with her relatively insensitive sexual accelerator, had
always been slow to orgasm and wasn’t all that interested in
having more of them. They were a lot of work most of the time,
and not rewarding enough to bother. She had masturbated very
rarely in her life, and then more out of curiosity than desire. And
she often wasn’t too interested in having an orgasm when she had
sex with Henry.
Henry, gentleman that he was, had a hard time with this.
“If you don’t have an orgasm, how can I tell that I satisﬁed you?”
he would ask.
“You can tell because I say that I’m satisﬁed! If I eat less pizza
than you and say that I’m full, do you doubt me? If I have two
glasses of wine and feel as tipsy as I want to feel, am I supposed
to try to increase my tolerance? If I read a novel but don’t feel
compelled to read the sequel, is there something wrong with
that?”
“Of course not,” was the answer to all three questions.
“So why,” Camilla said, “do you need me to experience some
physiological reﬂex in order to feel like I’ve had an awesome
time?”
“Because that reﬂex is how I know you were satisﬁed!”
It was one of those disagreements where each person’s point of
view is so obvious to themselves but so foreign to the other person
that they didn’t even know where to start. Their solution was the

[PDF page 254]

kind of problem solving that shows me they’ll be together for
decades. They literally switched places—they swapped seats—
and took on the other person’s point of view. Camilla argued for
Henry, and he argued for her.
Camilla said, “If you don’t have an orgasm, then I can’t feel
certain that you really liked and wanted the sex we had.”
Henry said, “If I don’t have an orgasm, all that means is I had as
much pizza as I wanted, it was great, and now I’m all set.”
And then he said, “Oh.”
Camilla continued, “But pizza isn’t the same as sex. Sex has a
destination, a goal, a ‘Final Real Ultimate It,’ and if you don’t have
that, then I’ve failed you!”
And then she said, “Oh.”
Henry said, “The only way you fail me is if you can’t accept me
the way I am.”
Camilla said, “Your orgasm tells me you accept me the way I
am.”
And they both said, “Oh.”
And then she moved from Henry’s chair to sit next to him with
her head on his shoulder. “Does my orgasm really mean that
much to you?” she asked.
Henry answered, “If I make you a special pizza and you only eat
one slice, how can I not wonder if you didn’t like it?”
“Hm. We’ll have to see if we can think of a logical solution,”
Camilla said.
They do, in chapter 9.
diﬃculty with orgasm
Very early on in grad school, two classmates and I sat together before
class one fall afternoon, talking about—what else?—sex. One of them
was recently married but had yet to have an orgasm with her new
husband.
“I can orgasm on my own, but somehow when he’s with me, I can’t
get there,” she said, her eyebrows sad and her mouth quirked in
confusion. “I know he feels rejected and takes it personally, but I love
him, I want to have an orgasm with him. I just can’t.”

[PDF page 255]

She blamed herself. Her husband blamed himself. Both felt ashamed
and broken and anxious that they would never experience “normal” sex.
At the time, I had no idea what was going on, but not long after that I
began a clinical internship where I learned that such diﬃculties are both
common and eminently treatable.
Distress about orgasm is the second most common reason people
seek treatment for sexual problems (after desire), occurring in about 5
to 15 percent of women.19 Diﬃculty with or absence of orgasm in certain
contexts is very common. For example, only 11 percent of college
women report having an orgasm the ﬁrst time they “hook up” with a new
partner, compared with 67 percent of college women having sex in the
context of a relationship of more than six months’ duration.20 Around 16percent of women have not had an orgasm, or are unsure whether
they’ve had an orgasm, by age twenty-eight.21 And there probably are
some women who never experience orgasm—the research indicates
something like 5–10 percent22—but it’s not clear how many of them are
not able to orgasm under any circumstances and how many are just not
interested enough to keep looking for the right context. Orgasm is, in
some ways, like riding a bicycle—it comes more naturally to some
people than others, and if you’re not motivated enough to keep trying
until you ﬁgure it out, you’ll never learn. And it’s a rare person who
genuinely needs to learn to ride a bicycle.
Most problems with orgasm are due to too much stimulation to SIS—
too much brakes, too many worries, too much stress, anxiety, shame, or
depression, including stress, anxiety, shame, or depression about
orgasm.23 If you’re interested enough to want to have an orgasm,chances are you can, given the right stimulation and a context that lets
you turn oﬀ the oﬀs. And if you can orgasm now in an ideal context,
chances are you can orgasm in a new and diﬀerent positive context—
like with your partner.
The most common word women used to describe their struggle with
orgasm is “frustrated.”24
We learned a lot about frustration in the last chapter. Remember the
monitor who watches your progress toward a goal? If orgasm is the goal
and the little monitor expects you to move quickly and smoothly toward
that goal, it will begin to get frustrated when the brakes are preventing
you from moving forward.
And does frustration fuel your accelerator . . . or does it hit the brake?

[PDF page 256]

Yeah. Brake.
The solution to frustration about orgasm is the same as the solution to
frustration around sexual desire. You have three potential targets: the
goal itself (orgasm), the kind and amount of eﬀort you’re investing, and
the criterion velocity—your expectation about how much eﬀort should be
required to achieve this goal.
The central approach to orgasm diﬃculties is to make pleasure the
goal, not orgasm. When you begin to feel frustrated, remember that’s
your little monitor feeling like you’re not making progress toward the goal
of orgasm. That’s the time to remind yourself that you are already at the
goal state as long as you are experiencing pleasure.
Orgasm isn’t the goal. Pleasure is the goal.
For women who sometimes (or always) struggle with orgasm, I’ve
included step-by-step instructions for practicing the skills of paying
attention to pleasure and letting go of the goal, including ways to adapt
the skill to having orgasm with your partner (see Appendix 1).
Never Had an Orgasm . . . as Far as She Knows
Students laugh when I add “as far as she knows,” but several times I’ve talked about what
childhood masturbation to orgasm is like—squeezing your legs around a swing set pole or
rocking your vulva against a stuﬀed animal, as well as touching your genitals with your
hands or pressing your pelvis into the mattress—and people have said, “Oh! So that’s
what I was doing!” Memories of childhood orgasm are often more like sleep orgasms or
exercise orgasms; they’re not particularly erotic. You’re not having sexual fantasies to fuel
your accelerator, but nor do you have a decade or more of cultural shaming to hit your
brakes.
ecstatic orgasm: you’re a ﬂock!
Orgasms can certainly happen in subideal or even adverse contexts—
but the brain-melting, toe-curling, turn-the-stars-into-rainbows type of
orgasm happens only in a spectacularly good context.
And what exactly is that context?
The answer to that question is the same as the answer to this
question: Why would wearing socks make it easier to have an orgasm?
Some students asked me this while I was eating lunch and chatting
with them. Brittany and Tiﬀany and I were talking about sex science, as
usual.

[PDF page 257]

“Huh?” I said through a mouthful of salad.
“I read about it on the Internet. Socks make it easier to orgasm,”
Brittany said.
“Oh! Well, if you read it on the Internet, it must be true,” I joked.
“No, I read it, too!” said Tiﬀany. “I think it was a real thing. I’ll ﬁnd it
and send you the link.”
She did, and it was true . . . kind of. It turns out putting on socks made
it easier for research participants to orgasm while masturbating in a
brain imaging machine.25
You have to wonder why. Are all brain imaging sex research
participants secret foot fetishists? Does it have something to do with
blood ﬂow to the genitals?
Nothing so arcane. Gert Holstege, the researcher leading the study,
said the research participants “were uncomfortable and had cold
feet.”26
Put on socks, have warmer feet, and have easier orgasms. Even in
the unerotic setting of a research laboratory, such a small shift can
make a diﬀerence.
And that type of shift is the key to moving from very nice orgasms to
award-winning orgasms. Here’s the science that tells you how.
All your internal states—your physical comfort, hunger, thirst,
sleepiness, loneliness, frustration, etc.—interact deep in the emotional
One Ring of your brain, and they inﬂuence each other in a process
called “integration.”27 When one state—like cold feet—interferes with
another state—like sexual arousal—that’s “subtractive integration.”
And when one state actively reinforces another state, that’s “additive
integration.” That’s what Laurie and Johnny experienced when they
were trying not to have sex and Johnny also told her the reasons he
loved making love with her. The proximity seeking of their attachment
mechanism mixed with their sexual motivation, and both were
intensiﬁed.
Additive integration can be an unmitigated good in your sexual
experience . . . and sometimes additive integration can draw you into
unhealthy dynamics, too. Olivia’s tendency to feel “driven” toward
orgasm when she’s stressed is one example. The stress adds to her
sexual motivation in an unhealthful way. And the women in John
Gottman’s research who experienced intense sex after their partners
were physically abusive were experiencing additive integration: The
threat to their attachment made it important that they bond with their

[PDF page 258]

partner. Sex is a crucial attachment behavior for human adults, so the
two states—separation anxiety plus sexual stimulation—reinforced each
other, to give rise to a sexual experience that was intense but ultimately
unsafe and unhealthy.
You can visualize the eﬀect of integration if you think of your brain as
a ﬂock of birds.
Do you know how a ﬂock works? There is no leader, no individual
who controls the group and says, “Hey, everybody, let’s ﬂy this way!”
Instead, each bird is individually following a set of rules, along the lines
of, “Avoid predators, ﬂy toward the magnetic pole, and also stay by your
neighbors.” When all the birds are following these rules, ﬂocking
emerges without anyone having to be in charge.
If you think of your brain as a ﬂock, then each “bird” is a diﬀerent drive
or incentive motivation system—stress, attachment and social
belonging, food appetite, curiosity and exploration, thirst, sleep, plans
for the future, emotional baggage from the past—all your competing
roles and identities in life are there in the ﬂock. You can think of your
sexual accelerator and brakes as birds in the ﬂock, too.
Ultimately, the “you” that is consciously aware of being a “self,” an
individual distinct from other individuals, is a composite self, a hologram
built of these multiple motivational and cognitive processes all engaging
with the environment and with each other, in a noisy, messy,
multidirectional tug-of-war. As a person capable of desiring multiple
things at once—food, sleep, sex, warmth, to be left alone, etc.—you are
a collective of desires. A ﬂock.
Complex things can happen in a ﬂock because there’s no speciﬁc
leader. If one bird notices a predator, it will ﬂy away (following the “avoid
predators” rule), and then all the birds around it will follow, pulled as if by
a magnetic force, not because of the predator but because they’re
following the “stay by your neighbors” rule.
And if your brain is a ﬂock, then orgasm is a destination the ﬂock can
ﬂy toward—a magnetic pole—and sexual pleasure is the ﬂock itself.
Sexual pleasure emerges, like ﬂocking behavior, from the interaction of
all these diﬀerent birds.
The more birds you have ﬂying toward orgasm, the greater the
pleasure you experience. If some of the birds are ﬂying toward orgasm
but others are trying to accomplish some other goal—as in, you’re trying
to masturbate to orgasm, but your feet are cold—the “ﬂock” that is your
brain will not move simultaneously in the same direction. Some of the

[PDF page 259]

birds may arrive at orgasm, but the experience won’t be the same as if
all the birds got there.
“Subtractive integration” happens when the birds ﬂying toward foot
warmth actively tug at the birds who would otherwise ﬂy toward orgasm.
Put on socks, and those birds are freed up and can move toward
orgasm. “Additive integration” happens when the birds ﬂying toward an
attachment object (your sex partner) tug their neighbors to ﬂy faster and
more enthusiastically. Fall desperately in love, and your ﬂock may rush
to orgasm at the littlest prompting.
The technical language for what I’m describing here is that sexual
pleasure is an emergent property of a complex dynamical system. But all
you need to remember is that peak sexual pleasure happens when the
whole collective works together, when all the birds are ﬂying in the same
direction, when all of your motivation systems are coordinated and
attuned to the environment in a way that gives rise to every system
moving collectively toward orgasm. Turn on all the ons and turn oﬀ all
the oﬀs. Get rid of all the predators and pile on diﬀerent kinds of
incentives at the magnetic pole: attachment, stress relief, curiosity,
expansive pleasure—all the motivations orgasm can fulﬁll. The more the
whole system is moving in the same direction, the more the orgasm
takes over your whole awareness, with every cell of your body focused
on the same thing: pleasure. Peak sexual pleasure requires all of you.
The most pleasurable orgasms happen when every part of you is
present and collaborating in pursuit of one shared goal: ecstasy.
If you haven’t ﬁgured it out by now, Olivia—the marathon runner,
the intense, driven, sensitive accelerator woman—is a
perfectionist. So here’s what she said when she learned about the
little monitor:
“Well that explains . . . you know, my whole life.”
Perfectionists set goals that are impossible—and if they
somehow manage to achieve a goal, they assume that goal must
be worthless and they set another, even more impossible goal.
Which puts them in a state of perpetual dissatisfaction.
“And then I’m my own lion, like, all the time,” Olivia said. “And
when you add the cultural brainwashing, that puts me in that out-
of-control place with sex.
“Jesus,” she added.

[PDF page 260]

Her experience moving at Patrick’s slower pace showed her the
potential in slowing down and allowing more of herself to align
with the goal of experiencing sexual pleasure—to take control of
the little monitor, so that it didn’t take control of her.
As an experiment one Saturday afternoon, Olivia tried
meditating while she gave Patrick an erotic massage. She
practiced keeping her mind quiet and focused on the present. Any
time a stray thought entered her mind, she acknowledged it
ﬂeetingly and then let it go, returning her attention to the sensation
of her partner’s skin under her hands. She found herself becoming
aroused, and she noticed that her thoughts were increasingly
turning toward orgasm, as her little internal monitor got impatient
to reach her goal. But each time she felt pulled toward orgasm,
she took a deep slow breath and returned her attention to Patrick.
She didn’t hit the brakes, she just took her foot oﬀ the
accelerator.
After Patrick’s orgasm, they switched, and Olivia kept her
attention tuned to the sensations of her body. As her arousal grew,
she continued to breathe deeply and slowly, not allowing her
abdominal muscles to tense too much.
The result was an orgasm that lasted several minutes as her
body shuddered and rolled, and Patrick stayed with her, holding
and kissing her, ﬁngers pressed against her vulva. It ended with
joyful tears and a kind of bubbly chattiness quite unlike Olivia’s
usual postorgasmic self. She felt open and raw and tender.
She told me later, “It was like being way out in the center of the
ocean, when I usually just surf on the shore. Bigger and
slower . . . and scarier, too, in some ways. I was all the way open.
I had to let go of all control. I had thought I was an erotic
powerhouse because I could have a lot of orgasms and because I
wanted sex often. But it turns out my greatest erotic power only
emerged when I stopped pushing toward orgasm and just allowed
pleasure to be still inside me.”
Not every woman wants to experience this kind of radical
vulnerability with her sexuality. Not every woman trusts her partner
enough to allow herself to let go so thoroughly. Not every woman
has a life that allows the time—an hour, generally, for most people
—and relaxation necessary to get there.

[PDF page 261]

But given the right context, I believe every woman is capable of
it, and, in my opinion, every woman deserves the opportunity to try
it. Even if you don’t experience minutes of oceanic ecstasy, it will
still be an hour well spent!
how do you medicate a ﬂock?
The kitchy 1968 cult movie Barbarella imagines a forty-ﬁrst century in
which people take “exaltation transference pellets” to have orgasms, to
save on the mess and bother of having sex. You take the pill, sit palm to
palm with your partner, and within a minute your body pulses and your
hair curls. Boom. Done.
You can see the appeal. I want ecstasy to be easy and instantaneous,
too, like taking a pill. Many of us live lives of constant tension, doubt,
obligation, and eﬀort. Couldn’t pleasure, of all things, just happen,
without our having to work at it?
The closest we can come to that in the twenty-ﬁrst century is a
vibrator. In fact, even though there are no drug treatments for “female
sexual dysfunction” approved by the US Food and Drug Administration,
there is an FDA-approved $200 vibrator!28 The right vibrator provides
an intensity of stimulation for your gas pedal that you just can’t replicate
with any nonmechanical stimulation. Even if your brakes are still on—
you’re stressed out, anxious, sad, or frustrated—a vibrator is often
intense enough to generate an orgasm much faster than manual
stimulation.
A vibrator won’t necessarily persuade all the birds to ﬂy in the same
direction. It provides high-intensity stimulation for the parts of your brain
that respond to sexually relevant stimuli; it can turn on the ons like
nobody’s business, but it doesn’t turn oﬀ the oﬀs.
This idea of pleasure as an emergent property of the interactions of a
collective of desires (aka a ﬂock) is what makes medicating pleasure,
arousal, desire, and/or orgasm so diﬃcult. A drug would have to twiddle
not just the SIS or SES but also the stress and the love and the body
image and trauma history and the relationship trust and the other things
that are known to impact women’s sexual wellbeing. Tugging one bird
toward orgasm won’t help you if the rest of the birds are busy avoiding
predators.

[PDF page 262]

Pleasure is an emergent property of the interaction of multiple
systems—it’s a process, not a state, an interaction, not a speciﬁc area
of the brain or the body. Pleasure is the whole ﬂock. Pleasure is all of
you.
Vibrators
About half of women in the United States have used a vibrator, and these women are
more likely to report better arousal, desire and orgasm.29 Eighty to ninety percent of those
women report experiencing no side eﬀects, and of those who did report side eﬀects like
numbness or irritation, nearly all of them said it lasted for less than a day.
A small study of women using vibrators as part of sex therapy found that women varied
a great deal in their response to the vibrator and had a wide range of feelings about the
experience.30 Initial resistance—“I should be able to orgasm without having to use a
‘tool’ ”—and concerns about whether vibrator use somehow disrupts sexual connection
with a partner—“Am I cheating on him with it?”—often gave way to a sense of freedom
and exploration. While there was a great deal of variety, even in a sample of only
seventeen women, the overall experience was a new kind of pleasure and opening up
their perspective on the idea of sexual autonomy.
You’ll recognize the worry that it’s not “natural” as the “sanctity” moral foundation that I
described in chapter 5. The idea that there’s a pure, good, natural way to have an orgasm
and a wrong, bad, unnatural way to have an orgasm is a cultural pigeonholing of
experience shaped by those three messages—Moral, Medical, and Media.
The concern people most often bring to me about vibrators is that they’ll get “addicted”
to them, but it doesn’t happen. Here’s what does happen: Orgasm with vibrators occurs
relatively quickly for many women because a vibrator provides such a high intensity of
stimulation. And some women get very comfortable with how quickly they orgasm with
their vibrator, which leads them to forget how long it took without the vibrator. And when
they get frustrated by how long that takes, the frustration makes it take even longer. But by
this point in the book, you probably know the answer to this problem: frustration =
impatient little monitor. So change the goal, change the eﬀort, change the criterion velocity.
Pleasure, not orgasm, is the goal. If it takes ﬁve minutes, that’s ﬁve minutes of pleasure.
Hooray! If it takes thirty minutes, that’s thirty minutes of pleasure! Also hooray!
ﬂying toward ecstasy
What the science gives us is this: To have more and better orgasms,
turn oﬀ all the oﬀs and slow down how you turn on the ons. Let your
whole brain get on the orgasm train.

[PDF page 263]

But what science can’t give you is permission to experience ecstatic
pleasure. In the end, that’s the key to spectacular orgasms. And only
you can give you that. Science can’t tell you how to feel about your
orgasms. Science can tell you only that how you feel about your
orgasms changes your orgasms. Science can tell you that feeling
shame, judgment, frustration, and fear about orgasm will diminish your
orgasmic experience, while acceptance, welcoming, conﬁdence, and joy
will expand your orgasmic experience. Science can tell you that your
brain is like a collective of desires, and the more the collective
collaborates, the more of you can move toward ecstasy.
But not one word of that science makes you more or less entitled to
the pleasure of your own skin and mind and heart. Your orgasms belong
to you, and all the science in the world can’t make you more delighted
with them or more afraid of them or more curious about them. The
science can’t do that. Only you can do that.
You were born entitled to all the pleasure your body can feel. You
were born entitled to pleasure in whatever way your body receives it, in
whatever contexts aﬀord it, and in whatever quantities you want it. Your
pleasure belongs to you, to share or keep as you choose, to explore or
not as you choose, to embrace or avoid as you choose.
So, if you wanted to, how would you ﬁnd your way to ecstasy? How
would you get all the birds ﬂying together in the same direction?
Patience, practice, and a sex-positive context.
You already know how to go about creating a sex-positive context—
the worksheets from chapters 3, 4, and 7 helped you with that. And you
understand how to build patience—by training your little monitor to make
sure you’ve got the right goal, the right kind and quantity of eﬀort, and
the right criterion velocity.
Which leaves us with the “practice” part.
Practice what?
Practice turning oﬀ the oﬀs. Here’s how:
The brain states that are dragging parts of your ﬂock away from
orgasm—stress, worry, spectatoring, chronically wondering if your kid is
going to knock on the door, or even just literal cold feet or other physical
discomfort—need to be taken seriously and have their needs met. They
need to be respected and treated like the sleepy hedgehog from chapter
4.
Be kind and gentle with each of the oﬀs, listen to what they need in
order to feel satisﬁed, and then satisfy them. Go back to your context

[PDF page 264]

worksheets: What hits your brakes? Consider the things in your
environment and also your own thoughts and feelings. What context do
you need in order to turn oﬀ those oﬀs?
Most of the oﬀs women experience have nothing to do with sex, and
many of them have straightforward, pragmatic solutions.
Chronically stressed? Complete the cycle with a good cry, a brisk
walk, a primal scream, or other physical release, as described in
chapter 4. Give yourself a solid twenty to sixty minutes to allow the
stress of the day to wind down with whatever rituals or practices help.
Baths, walks, exercise, cooking, meditation, yoga, a glass of wine,
whatever works.
Constantly monitoring for footsteps in the hallway? Arrange for a time
when no one else is home.
Tired? Take a nap, or even just rest for twenty minutes. Squicked out
by grit on the sheets? Change them! Cold feet? Put on socks!
Sometimes it really is this simple.
Other oﬀs are more complex and require longer-term solutions, such
as those I addressed earlier: self-critical thoughts or other body image
challenges, lack of trust in your relationship, trauma history, sexual
disgust. It took decades of planting and cultivation to create the garden
you currently have. It won’t change overnight. Give yourself permission
to make progress gradually, and celebrate all the incremental steps
between where you are now and where you’d like to be.
And the most important turnoﬀ the oﬀs practice of all: self-kindness.
Too often women get stuck in their sexual growth because they can’t get
past their belief that something “shouldn’t” hit their brakes. It shouldn’t
turn them oﬀ to have the lights on, they shouldn’t be so hung up about
their bodies. “Should” is all about what you’re “doing wrong.”
Pop quiz: Does a belief that you’re Doing Something Wrong with sex
hit the accelerator . . . or the brake?
Yeah.
So when something hits the brake, what do you do? You take it
seriously. Listen to it. Be gentle with it, like a sleepy hedgehog. Even if
you wish something like having the lights on didn’t hit your brakes, the
fact is it might, and that’s okay. It’s also okay to wish it didn’t. But
believing it shouldn’t only hits the brakes more. Recognizing that frees
you up to do something about it—something like having sex with unlit
candles in the room for a week or two, then with one lit tea light candle,
then two, then three . . .

[PDF page 265]

You see, sex is not context dependent—sex can happen more or less
anywhere. Pleasure is context dependent. Create a context where you
can experience pleasure, and sexual ecstasy will follow, given time,
practice, and genuine solutions to turn oﬀ the oﬀs.
Appendix 2 oﬀers instructions for achieving ecstasy. Try it!
Remember: Each member of the ﬂock has its own needs and
motivations. Turn oﬀ all the oﬀs, and turn on all the ons.
Merritt had believed all her life that orgasm was supposed to be
easy, and that her struggle with it made her a freak. She believed
that it was supposed to feel a certain way and have a certain
eﬀect. But she wanted to learn to trust herself, so that she could
open the door wide to pleasure. So she stopped comparing her
experience with her expectations and simply allowed her
experience to be what it is. She just enjoyed the sex she was
having instead of worrying about whether it was the sex she
“should” be having. She created an environment of acceptance,
where the parts of her mind that needed to worry, that needed to
avoid something bad happening, could instead move toward
something good. It took time. And practice. And positive meta-
emotions (that’s chapter 9).
Did it work? For her, it did.
Merritt is a writer and she was raised religious, which might
explain the email she sent me near the end of her don’t-have-an-
orgasm-with-Carol experience. Or it might not. Lots of people start
talking about God and spiritual experiences when they ﬁnd their
way to ecstasy. The language of mundane human experience,
anatomy, physiology, even relationship doesn’t feel large enough
to contain it.
Anyway, this is what she wrote:
No storm can shake my inmost calm
While to that rock I’m clinging.
Since Love is lord of heaven and Earth,
How can I keep from singing?
It’s from a hymn called “How Can I Keep from Singing?” Pete
Seeger and Enya and many others have recorded it. It’s about
what happens when you make contact with the peace at the
center and core of yourself, which is the same peace at the center

[PDF page 266]

and core of the universe, and it resonates through you, like you’re
a bell that’s ringing.
That is what happens when you turn oﬀ all the oﬀs and allow all
the ons to focus on one shared goal: pleasure.
tl;dr
• Orgasms happen in your brain, not your genitals.
• Thirty percent of women are reliably orgasmic from vaginal penetration alone. The
remaining 70 percent are sometimes, rarely, or never orgasmic from penetration alone.
The most common way for women to orgasm is from clitoral stimulation.
• Orgasm is not an evolutionary adaptation, necessary for survival. It’s a fantastic bonus!
• To have bigger, better orgasms, turn oﬀ more of the oﬀs, and turn on the ons more
gradually.

[PDF page 267]

nine
meta-emotions
THE ULTIMATE SEX-POSITIVE CONTEXT
Laurie and Johnny had tried all the tricks. But in the end, what
made the diﬀerence was when Laurie chose pleasure—for herself.
Armed with the decision to just start paying attention to what it
feels like, Laurie went to a weekend mindfulness retreat called
something like Awakening the Feminine Divine. She practiced
yoga and slept nine hours a night. She ate mindfully. She breathed
mindfully. She shared her feelings with strangers, made new
friends, and found a renewed sense that she was not alone in her
struggles. And, let me just emphasize this, because Laurie would
want me to: She slept nine hours a night.
She focused for twenty-one hours (the time she wasn’t sleeping)
on really noticing what it felt like to be alive and move through the
world.
And she came back a new woman.
“I can’t be a source of joy in the lives of the people I love if I
can’t even be a source of joy for myself,” she announced. “And
what I want, more than anything, is to be a source of joy in the
lives of the people I love.”
“Wait a second, Johnny and I and everyone else who loves you,
we’ve all been saying that for months,” I said. “What did they do to
you at that retreat?”
“I stood in the Divine Gaze of Lakshmi, the Goddess of
Auspiciousness, and I felt my own power and beauty,” she recited
seriously. Then she cracked a grin and said, “You’ll probably tell
me that’s just a metaphor for activating something or other in my
mesolimbic whatever, but I don’t give a damn about the science. It
frickin’ worked.”

[PDF page 268]

This chapter is about the science Laurie doesn’t give a damn
about.
It frickin’ works.
Here we are in the ﬁnal chapter. So far we’ve learned that in some
important ways women’s sexual response often does not follow the
same patterns as men’s sexual response:
• Women, as a group, have more sensitive brakes and less sensitive accelerators, though
there’s lots of variation.
• To a greater degree than men’s, women’s sexual response is sensitive to external
circumstances and internal brain state—to context.
•  Women are less likely than men to experience concordance between their genital
response and their subjective arousal.
• And more women than men experience responsive or context-sensitive desire.
All of which may come as a surprise to the 10–20 percent of women
whose sexual response is similar to the “standard narrative.” We also
learned that people, especially women, vary widely from each other and
change substantially across their life spans.
This chapter brings all of that together, with a single core truth about
what makes the diﬀerence in a woman’s sexual wellbeing:
How you feel about your sexuality is more important than your
sexuality itself.
Not what you think about it, not what you believe about it, not what
you’ve been told about it, not what it’s like, what you do, or even what
choices you make—all of those are inﬂuenced by how you feel about it,
but it’s the “how you feel about it” part that’s the key. Your meta-
emotions.
I’ll illustrate this with contrasting examples.
The ﬁrst is from neurologist Oliver Sacks’s book Hallucinations, in
which he describes a patient he calls Gertie C., who told him she
sometimes has sexually explicit hallucinations. Gertie C.’s experience is
far from typical, but to me that’s what makes it such a fantastic example
of meta-emotions. Sacks writes:
When she told me about [her erotic hallucinations], she added, anxiously, “You surely
wouldn’t forbid a friendly hallucination to a frustrated old lady like me!” I replied that if her
hallucinations had a pleasant and controllable character, they seemed rather a good idea
under the circumstances. After this, the paranoid quality dropped away, and her

[PDF page 269]

hallucinatory encounters became purely amicable and amorous. She developed a humor
and tact and control, never allowing herself a hallucination before eight in the evening and
keeping its duration to thirty or forty minutes at most. If her relatives stayed too late, she
would explain ﬁrmly but pleasantly that she was expecting “a gentleman visitor from out of
town” in a few minutes’ time, and she felt he might take it amiss if he was kept waiting
outside. She now receives love, attention, and invisible presents from a hallucinatory
gentleman who visits faithfully each evening.1
Notice that when she was reassured that the hallucinations were
“rather a good idea,” their quality became more positive, and so she
experienced a kind of pleasure and aﬀection she would otherwise have
lacked in her life. How she felt about it is the only thing that changed,
and that change transformed the experience from paranoid to amorous.
I ﬁgure if Gertie can enjoy her sex life, surely the rest of us have that
potential, too!
Contrast her experience with that of Ms. B., whose story opens a New
York Times article about women’s sexual medicine. The article begins:
Since Ms. B. entered her mid-40s, she says, sex has been more about smoke and mirrors
than thunder and lightning. She is rarely if ever interested enough to initiate it with her
partner of 10 years, and she does not reach climax during the act.
She wishes it were otherwise.2
Having gotten this far in the book, you’ll recognize that Ms. B.’s desire
style may be responsive or context-sensitive rather than spontaneous,
and it sounds like she’s not reliably orgasmic with intercourse. Both of
these put her squarely in the majority.
And she wishes it were otherwise.
Which is perfectly understandable. I imagine she learned (as most of
us do) that spontaneous desire and orgasms with penetration are
normal, and since that’s not what she’s experiencing, she believes she’s
abnormal. Broken. If I believed I were broken, I would wish it were
otherwise, too.
But she’s not broken, she’s normal—in fact, she’s typical. And what
eﬀect does wishing her normal sexuality were otherwise have on her
sexual wellbeing? Does it activate the accelerator or hit the brakes?
The result is that she herself describes herself as “sexually dead.”
And it doesn’t get much worse than that.
Now, let’s imagine, just hypothetically, that Ms. B. tried on the
possibility of, say, feeling curious about her lack of desire, instead of

[PDF page 270]

wishing it were diﬀerent. What if she said to herself, “Huh, I notice I
haven’t wanted sex much lately. That’s an interesting little puzzle! It’s
normal for my desire to change as my context changes, so I wonder
what part of my context has changed, to inﬂuence my desire? And I
wonder what sort of context my partner and I could create that would
cause me to want sex so much that I can’t stop myself from jumping his
bones?”
Sometimes it’s as simple as that, like ﬂipping a light switch. But not
always. Sometimes, before you can explore your own sexual functioning
with curiosity and warmth, you must move through the fear or rage or
grief that is standing between you and that warm light. And that’s not
easy. But it’s possible. It happens in my classroom and my workshops
every time I teach.
One more example: A student sat on the couch in my oﬃce and
described how her desire for sex had vanished in the course of her
otherwise very happy two-year relationship. She had always
experienced spontaneous desire in her (uniformly bad) previous
relationships. We gradually ﬁgured out that the instability of her bad
relationships had fueled her use of sex as an attachment behavior, as I
described in chapter 4, and so now, in a stable, trusting relationship, her
desire was behaving very diﬀerently.
“So what do I do if my desire for sex is only spontaneous in bad
relationships?” she asked.
“What you do,” I said, “is you start loving responsive desire. Figure
out what contexts give you a fantastic relationship and hot sex. Context-
free spontaneous desire is just the man-as-default standard, and screw
that. Don’t use somebody else’s standard to measure the quality of your
sex life.”
Which is when I saw the transformation happen in her head.
“That makes so much sense! Oh my God, I want to tell the whole
world !” she said.
“Me, too!” I answered. “That’s why I’m writing a book!” And then I
emailed her a draft of this chapter.
Because in this chapter, I tell you how. I’ll start by describing how your
feelings about your feelings—your meta-emotions—inﬂuence your
sexual functioning: It’s the little monitor in your brain again. I’ll talk about
the sexual “map” in your brain, which the little monitor is using to guide
her opinions, but which has been drawn according to the cultural
messages I described in chapter 5, so it’s often totally unreliable. I’ll

[PDF page 271]

describe the obstacles to changing your little monitor’s opinions, and
then I’ll take you step by step through the challenging—but richly
rewarding—process of changing your meta-emotions in order to create
a sexual connection with yourself and your partner that overﬂows with
abundance and joy.
I aspire for us all to be like that little old lady peacefully enjoying her
sexy hallucinations. If Gertie can learn to welcome her erotic life with her
hallucinatory gentleman caller, surely we all can embrace our sexuality
as it is, and thus make it the best it can be, regardless of how it diﬀers
from what we were taught it “should” be.
can’t get no . . .
Meta-emotions are how you feel about how you feel, and they go back to
the little monitor in your brain who has an opinion about how much
progress you should be making as you move toward a goal. That
opinion is the “meta” part. It’s how you feel about what you’re
experiencing.
When you experience your sexuality in the way your monitor expects,
she feels good. Satisﬁed. When you experience your sexuality in a way
that creates a discrepancy between your experience and the monitor’s
expectations, the monitor gradually becomes frustrated . . . and then
angry. Eventually she pushes you oﬀ an emotional cliﬀ into the pit of
despair, as she gives up and decides you can’t achieve your goal state.
Suppose you’re not reliably orgasmic from intercourse. That’s normal.
Because you’ve read chapter 8, you know a lot about other strategies
for having orgasms, especially from clitoral stimulation. And when you
feel good about your body as it is, it’s easy to start trying out new
strategies.
But what if you feel frustrated about your lack of orgasms with
intercourse? Or ashamed? Or sad? Or judgmental? Will that make it
easier or more diﬃcult to try out new strategies and ﬁnd success?
Feeling okay about how you feel—even when it’s not what you
expected—is the key to extraordinary sex.
As we saw in chapter 7, there are three ways you can develop more
positive meta-emotions. You can ask yourself:
• Is this the right goal for me?

[PDF page 272]

• Am I putting in the right amount of the right kind of eﬀort?
• Are my expectations of how much eﬀort this particular goal requires realistic?
We’ve seen these strategies in action throughout the book: In this
chapter, when Dr. Sacks tells Gertie that her hallucinations seem like a
good idea, her goal state changes, so that the gap between her present
state and her goal state closes. She is already where and what she
wants to be. With no discrepancy, there can be no negative meta-
feelings, only satisfaction and delight. So her little monitor is well
satisﬁed. And in chapter 5, when Laurie decided to stop trying to want
sex with Johnny and just allowed herself not to, she too closed the gap
between where she was and where she wanted to be, which opened the
door to aﬀection without performance demand.
In chapter 8, when Olivia meditated her way to an extended orgasm,
she was practicing being present as she was, rather than pushing
forward to some goal. She kept the same goal—ecstasy—but she
changed the kind of eﬀort she was investing. And in chapter 7, when
Merritt, instead of trying on the aspirational identity of a woman who
loves sex, embraced the identity of a woman who did not want sex, she
was changing her assessment of the kind of eﬀort required to attain her
goal of trusting herself. The result was not sinking down forever into a
state of not wanting sex—on the contrary! Allowing herself to be where
she was opened the door to where she wanted to go.
By contrast, Ms. B.’s little monitor is deeply dissatisﬁed, convinced
that there is a wide gulf between where she is and where she ought to
be—and furthermore, she feels utterly helpless to do anything about it.
She’s in the pit of despair. She has collapsed into the hopeless grief that
comes when the little monitor is convinced that a particular goal state is
unattainable. Did she try to create change and fail and try again and fail
again, or, when her sexuality fell short of the mark (a mark set by
cultural standards that have nothing to do with reality) did her body go
right to shutdown? I don’t know. But I do know that the little monitor can
learn, and Ms. B. can teach it—if she chooses to. She can change her
goal, her eﬀort, or her criterion velocity.
Before she can begin, though, she must recognize that her “map” is
wrong.
the map and the terrain

[PDF page 273]

For many of us, the goal states we have in mind—such as spontaneous
desire or orgasm with intercourse—are not goals we have chosen
consciously for ourselves. We absorbed them from our culture in the
form of sexual scripts. These scripts provide the structure for the beliefs
through which we interpret the sexual world. Becoming aware of your
scripts is the ﬁrst step to changing your meta-emotions.
Over the last few decades, research has followed how sexual scripts
have changed in Western culture. Recent cultural scenario scripts may
include:
• “Men’s sexuality is simple and women’s sexuality is complex.”
• “Women don’t have as strong a sex drive as men.”
• “Orgasm is central to a positive sexual encounter.”
• “Sex is more emotional for women than for men.”3
The scripts are written into your brain early, by your family and culture
—remember the Moral Message, the Medical Message, and the Media
Message from Chapter 5?
But scripts aren’t about what we intellectually believe is true. They act
as a template for our emotional One Ring and for our little monitor to
ﬁlter and organize information. You can disagree with a script and still
ﬁnd yourself behaving according to it and interpreting your experience in
terms of it.
The technical term for this process of organizing your experience
according to a preexisting template is “probabilistic generative model.” It
means that information—anything you see, hear, smell, touch, or taste—
goes ﬁrst to your emotional brain, where prior learning (possibly about
lemons or little rat jackets, possibly about body image or sexual disgust)
plus your present brain state (stress, love, self-criticism, disgust, etc.)
combine to shape the initial decisions your brain makes about whether
to move toward or away from that information. That initial decision sets
oﬀ a series of expectations about what else might be true and what
might happen next.
A simpler way to understand it, I think, is in terms of maps versus
terrains. Your knowledge about sex is a map of the sexual terrain (or
garden!) where you experience sexuality.
Sadly, most people’s sexual maps are unreliable. We’re like Brendan
Fraser’s character in the movie Blast from the Past. His parents raise
him in a bomb shelter, mistakenly believing that there was a nuclear
attack in 1962, and when he ﬁnally goes out into the world thirty-ﬁve

[PDF page 274]

years later, he is navigating through a landscape that has almost nothing
to do with what he has been taught. Like him, we’ve got this map in our
heads and we step into the terrain expecting to ﬁnd a path in one place,
and instead we’re instantly lost.
As we saw in chapter 5, our maps may have places that are way
more than thirty-ﬁve years out of date.
But perhaps the biggest challenge is that when the map and the
terrain don’t match, our brains try to make the map true, forcing our
experience into the shape of the map. “No, no, this is the trail,” we say
as we stumble through the thicket. “It says so on the map.”
A couple years ago, I talked to a young woman who had learned most
of what she knew—or rather, what she thought she knew—about sex by
watching porn. She was genuinely surprised when nothing in her ﬁrst
sexual encounters happened the way she expected. She thought
orgasms would come easily and often. She thought direct clitoral
stimulation would always make her see stars. She thought wrong. But
she kept trying to make her experience match the map. She kept
behaving the way people in the ﬁlms behave, assuring herself that
because she was doing what she was supposed to be doing, the feeling
she was having must be pleasure.
It was months before the dissonance between what she expected to
experience and what she was actually experiencing became clear to
her. That’s when she came to me, convinced that she must be broken.
When I told her that women are more likely to have orgasms later in a
relationship than the ﬁrst time they have sex with a new partner, she
truly didn’t believe me, so convinced was she that her map was right
and her terrain—her body—was wrong.
I also told her that pleasure is context dependent, so that even clitoral
stimulation doesn’t feel good unless it’s in the right context. “Like
tickling,” I said. “If it doesn’t feel good, that just means you haven’t got
the right context yet. When clitoral stimulation doesn’t feel good it’s not
because your clitoris doesn’t work, it’s usually because you’re not
turned on enough yet.”
Which brings me to the ﬁrst step in creating positive meta-emotions.
Olivia is One Big Yes when it comes to sex, which has the
potential to create profound ecstasy . . . or profound self-doubt and
anxiety, not to mention the chasing dynamic. And it all depends on
how she feels about her capacity for Yes.

[PDF page 275]

Way back at the beginning of the ﬁrst chapter, Olivia found out
that her “map” wasn’t true—the story she told herself about
wanting sex because of her hormones was a metaphorization that
shielded her against the cultural messages that would tell her
she’s a bully.
But she drew a new map—grounded in the science and in
nonjudgmental attention to her own internal experience. She
realized that her sensitive accelerator could team up with her little
monitor to create that out-of-control feeling, and they could also
team up to create joyful pleasure. She got the out-of-control
feeling when she allowed the spiral of stress/self-criticism/stress to
escalate. She got the joyful pleasure when she learned to
deescalate by allowing the stress to run its course, without hitting
either the brakes or the accelerator.
“Slow down. Stay still.” That’s Olivia’s advice for all higher-
desire partners. “Don’t chase, don’t push or pull. Be like the
person with the broom on a curling team. Clear the path to sex.”
When there’s no pressure to perform, Patrick is creative,
curious, playful, and unabashedly experimental. He knows what a
gift Olivia’s sensitive accelerator can be, and he’s aware of the
challenges it presents.
So. When Olivia ﬁnished her master’s degree, he set up a kind
of sensual treasure hunt for her, involving most of her collection of
toys, two kinds of lube, at least one instance of being carried,
naked, handcuﬀed, and blindfolded, down the hallway to another
apartment in their building, and several of their very good friends.
(Which may be the best “science made my sex life better” story
I’ve ever heard.)
At the end of it, over a giant meal, Olivia, swimming in
endorphins and oxytocin, asked Patrick to marry her—mostly
kidding.
Mostly.
Olivia is One Big Yes. It’s a gift. It’s a challenge. She maximizes
her sexual potential when she allows her sexual response to grow
to capacity, without pushing in any speciﬁc direction.
Slow down. Stay still. Don’t push or pull. Allow sensation to
grow.

[PDF page 276]

positive meta-emotions step 1: trust the terrain
The ﬁrst step in changing your meta-emotions is recognizing the
diﬀerence between the goal state dictated by the script and what you’re
actually experiencing. I have two general rules of thumb for navigating
this diﬀerence:
• When the map (the script) doesn’t seem to ﬁt the terrain (your experience), the map is
wrong, not the terrain.
• Everyone’s terrain and everyone’s map are diﬀerent from everyone else’s.
What these two rules mean is that your best source of knowledge
about your sexuality is your own internal experience. When you notice
disagreement between the terrain and the map—and everyone does, at
some point—always assume your body is right. And assume everyone’s
body is diﬀerent from yours—as are everyone’s maps. Which means
everyone’s journey from lost traveler to master navigator will be diﬀerent.
I’ve used hypothetical twins a few times throughout the book, but this
time I can use real-life twins to illustrate my point. My sister Amelia and I
are identical twins. We have the same DNA, were born within ten
minutes of each other, grew up in the same house, went to the same
schools, watched the same TV shows, and read many of the same
books. And yet by the time we started our sexual lives, we had very
diﬀerent maps in our heads.
I had my own unique version of the Media Message in my head. I
believed that the Ideal Sexual Woman was an adventurous, noisy
female whom men lusted after for her skill and her enthusiasm. She was
—of course!—easily orgasmic from penetration, she experienced
spontaneous desire, and her vagina got so wet. Any woman who didn’t
want to try new things was a prude, hopelessly hung up and neurotic.
Notice that the Ideal Sexual Woman does not necessarily enjoy a
great deal of pleasure; she just appears to experience pleasure. That’s
what a sexual woman should be, as far as my culture had taught me,
and so that’s what I performed. By the time I started my ﬁrst sexual
relationship, I was a sexual product, processed and packaged for the
pleasure of others.
This map was so potent and persuasive that I couldn’t separate what
I believed I should be experiencing from what I actually was
experiencing. At eighteen, in my ﬁrst sexual relationship—with a man
who would later become my stalker and threaten to kill me—I would

[PDF page 277]

dream that my partner was hurting me, and in my dream I would laugh. I
would laugh until even I didn’t know if I liked being hurt.
At the time, I had no idea how screwed up that was.
It was toward the end of that relationship (which ended when I called
the police) that I ﬁrst looked at my vulva and wept.
I had the improbable good fortune of beginning my training as a sex
educator in the same semester that I got into that abusive relationship.
At the same time that I was marketing myself as a sexual product, in
accordance with my instruction by women’s magazines, romance
novels, and porn, I was learning the truth about sexual wellbeing. Over
the next decade, I gained a vast store of knowledge, but more
importantly I gained a radically more healthful attitude: that a woman’s
body and her pleasure belong to her and no one else; that it’s possible
to say no to intercourse without saying no to all the other things that
come with it—the love and the aﬀection and the pleasure and the play;
and that my own internal experience was a legitimate guide for whether
or not I wanted to try something.
Perhaps most compelling of all, I recognized that it is normal for my
internal experience sometimes to be self-contradictory (I’m a ﬂock!),
and the more gently and patiently I pay attention to the full depth of my
own internal experience—especially if I am gentle and patient with the
uncomfortable feelings—the more I experience conﬁdence and joy.
Amelia, by contrast, had her own unique version of the Moral
Message in her head by the time we got to adolescence. Smart women
didn’t want sex, she believed. Smart girls were interested in minds, not
bodies; only stupid girls were ruled by their “base, animal instincts.” This
is a classic middle-class Victorian attitude. She believed the Ideal
Sexual Woman was more or less asexual, and she took her own lack of
interest in sex as evidence that she was intelligent.
And then she started having sex, and eventually even liking it! So she
opened up a new area on the map, explored new territory. She created
space for the idea of sex as recreation, a fun thing to do on a Friday
night, as long as X-Files wasn’t on. She redrew the map to allow for
both being smart and enjoying sex as a source of pleasure, but still she
was navigating through a fairly narrow band of terrain.
It was only when she met the man she would eventually marry that
she began experiencing sex as something through which she could
discover human connection and a deeper pleasure than mere
entertainment, a pleasure connected to her personhood. This was a

[PDF page 278]

whole new map, which included terrain she had never known existed—
though it had been there the whole time, unexplored.
She’s been with the same partner for ﬁfteen years and has had many
of the same pleasures and struggles that so many women experience in
long-term relationships. And while I had the great good fortune of
becoming a sex educator, she had the good fortune of having a sex
educator for a sister, so she could be among the women who called me
or emailed me to say, “Is this normal?” She’s like the majority of women
—context-sensitive desire and nonconcordant arousal. And so, like a lot
of women, she sends my blog posts to her husband and says, “This!
See?”
We’re an example of how even genetically identical gardens, planted
with very similar seeds, may still grow into very diﬀerent terrains. It turns
out she’s got a slightly more sensitive brake than I do, and I’ve got a
slightly more sensitive accelerator. So perhaps the Media Message was
a slightly better ﬁt for my native sexuality and the Moral Message a
slightly better ﬁt for Amelia’s, and so diﬀerent ideas took root and grew.
For both of us, by the time we began having sex with partners, we had
some set ideas about what that experience was supposed to be like.
And both us of, like nearly all women, went through a time of realizing
how poorly prepared we were and then relearning what it meant to be a
sexual woman.
For both of us, education about the science of sexual wellbeing
helped us draw maps that better represent our sexual terrains, which in
turn allowed us to communicate about our sexual wellbeing more
eﬀectively with our partners. It also helped us let go of judging other
women for having experiences that contradicted our own—because it
turns out everyone really is just diﬀerent.
But the information gathering, redrawing the map, was not the hard
part—not for either of us, not for the woman who learned about sex from
porn, and not for most of the women I talk with.
positive meta-emotions step 2: let go of the map (the hard part)
Knowing how your sexuality works is important; welcoming your
sexuality as it is, without judgment or shame, is more important. And
that’s the hard part for a lot of women.

[PDF page 279]

Upon learning that they are normal, many women instantly feel
liberated and satisﬁed with their sexuality in a way they never have
before. The light goes on and they say, “My map was wrong all along
and I’m actually normal!” But some women, even though they can
accept that their responsive desire or nonpenetrative orgasms are
normal, can’t accept that this new kind of normal is something worth
being. One commenter on my blog put it this way: “I think you’re
glossing over the fact that ‘responsive desire’ is a lesser desire than
[spontaneous] desire.”
Eighty-ﬁve percent of women have “a lesser desire”? Yeowch.
The construction of responsive desire as “lesser” is not a fact, of
course, it’s a value judgment, an opinion. If responsive desire is how
your body feels, then lesser desire is the meta-feeling, how you feel
about how your body feels. “I shouldn’t have to put all this eﬀort in,” you
think. “Desire should just happen.” And beneath that thought is the
feeling, “I shouldn’t be like this. I’m inadequate.”
And is the feeling, “I’m inadequate,” going to activate the accelerator,
or hit the brakes?
Right.
So the hard part isn’t knowing that you’re responsive or
nonconcordant or whatever else is true right now about your sexuality.
The hard part is liking your sexuality as it is, when for multiple decades
the world has been trying to convince you you’re broken. The hard part
is ﬁnding beauty in a terrain that doesn’t match the map.
Why is it hard?
I can’t claim to have direct scientiﬁc evidence for what I’m about to
say—I’m not even sure what direct evidence would look like—but I’ll tell
you truly what I think, based on what I know of the science and what I
know of women’s experience as they move toward a more profound
sexual wellbeing.
I think that letting go of negative meta-emotions—like the feeling
underneath the thought, “I shouldn’t be this way” or “I wish my sexuality
were diﬀerent”—requires that your little monitor move through the pit of
despair, recognizing that your previous goal state was unattainable—or
at least unattainable in the way you expected to attain it.
Our scripts or maps include clear ideas about what the goal, eﬀort,
and timelines of our sexuality should be. We should be easily orgasmic,
experience spontaneous desire, all of those man-as-default myths.
Letting go of those often seems similar to letting go of self-criticism, as I

[PDF page 280]

described in chapter 5. We think that if we let go, we’re giving up hope;
it feels like failure. This is as true for sex-related goals, like desire style,
orgasm, and pleasure, as it is for goals in the rest of life—ending a
relationship, deciding not to complete a degree or go to grad school,
accepting that your healthy body shape doesn’t match the (unhealthy)
cultural ideal.
This is what can make changing your map so diﬃcult. It requires a
little journey through the pit of despair, grieving for the map that was
wrong and all the places you missed as a result.
Emotions are tunnels: You have to go through the darkness to get to
the light at the end. Sometimes that’s fairly easy. Sometimes it hurts like
hell. Sometimes letting go of a particular goal feels like you have to let
go of your entire identity.
And when letting go hurts, that’s where nonjudging comes in.
how to let go: nonjudging
If you’re anxious about your sexuality, or you’re angry with yourself for
feeling (or not feeling) a certain way, or you’re ashamed, what you will
often do is put that feeling about your sexuality in a box and hide it
somewhere deep inside you. And the feeling sits in that box, waiting to
complete its cycle. You haven’t gotten rid of it, you’ve just put it on hold.
It’s as if that small part of you is sitting on a roller coaster, stuck at the
top of an ascent—eventually it will have to come down. It has to. It has
to complete its cycle.
Now suppose that instead of putting it in a box, you’re aware of your
feeling about your sexuality and are curious about it, or you’re gently
aﬀectionate toward it, as you would be toward a tearful newborn or a
sad, shy kitten, or you’re simply neutrally observing from the sidelines of
your own internal experience. These kinds of compassionate self-
awareness create a context that doesn’t hit the brakes and instead
allows your internal state to complete its cycle.
I used to think that it was the awareness of your internal state that
mattered, but in study after study, “observation” of internal state is not a
signiﬁcant predictor of wellbeing.4 No, the best meta-emotion predictor
of wellbeing is a variable known as “nonjudge.”5
People who score low on nonjudge agree with statements like, “I tell
myself that I shouldn’t be thinking the way I’m thinking” and “When I

[PDF page 281]

have distressing thoughts or images, I judge myself as good or bad,
depending on what the thought/image is about.” People who are high on
nonjudging say the opposite: When they have distressing thoughts, they
simply recognize that that’s what’s happening, without judging
themselves as good or bad, right or wrong. In other words, nonjudging
allows you to feel what you feel, whether or not it makes sense to you,
whether or not it’s comfortable, whether or not it’s what you believe you
should be feeling. Nonjudging is neutrally noticing your own internal
states.
I’ll illustrate this with my favorite research paper on the subject, a
recent small study that looked at the role of mindfulness in people’s
experience with generalized anxiety disorder.6 The researchers
measured, among other things, participants’ anxiety symptoms and the
degree of interference with daily life these symptoms caused, along with
participants’ responses on the Five Factor Mindfulness Questionnaire.
Two of the ﬁve factors are “observe”—noticing your internal experience
—and “nonjudge”—not categorizing your internal experience as either
good or bad.
So dig this: Research participants who were less aﬀected by their
symptoms did not experience lower frequency or severity of symptoms,
nor were they more aware of their internal state—the “observe” factor.
Nope. The people who were less impacted by their symptoms were
those who were more nonjudging! In other words, it isn’t the symptoms
that predict how much anxiety disrupts a person’s life, it’s how a person
feels about those symptoms. It’s not how you feel—it’s not even being
aware of how you feel. It’s how you feel about how you feel. And people
who feel nonjudging about their feelings do better.
The body of research speciﬁcally measuring nonjudging in relation to
sexual functioning is small but growing. In a tiny study of sensorimotor
sex therapy, women in the treatment group reported that the therapy
helped them to feel less like they “should” be experiencing something in
particular and more able to be gentle and forgiving with themselves.7
(Sound like anything from, oh, say, chapter 5? Remember self-
compassion?) Though the study was too small to ﬁnd statistically
signiﬁcant results, the qualitative ﬁndings are encouraging, and they
reinforce the idea that it’s not awareness of your sexuality that matters,
it’s how you feel about what you are aware of.

[PDF page 282]

nonjudging = “emotion coaching”
I’ve said it more than once: Emotions are tunnels. You have to go all the
way through the darkness to get to the light at the end. And if you just
keep putting one foot in front of the other, you’ll get where you want to
go. Some of us know how to go through the tunnel because we grew up
in families that taught us how. Some of us know how to go through the
tunnel because we learned that skill later in life. And some of us haven’t
had a chance to learn that skill yet. But we can always learn, by
becoming our own emotion coaches.
In Raising an Emotionally Intelligent Child, psychologist John
Gottman describes four diﬀerent approaches a parent can take in
responding to a child’s feelings: emotion coaching, dismissing,
disapproving, and laissez-faire. I’ll refer to the last three (less
supportive) approaches together as emotion dismissing.8
Emotion coaching teaches you that
• You can recognize lower-intensity emotions so that you can manage them before they
escalate.
• Negative emotions are a natural response to negative life events. Because negative life
events are sometimes inevitable, so are negative emotions.
• Because negative emotions are a normal part of life, they are discussed, given names,
and empathized with.
• “It’s normal that sometimes it feels hard,” “When you feel bad, we love you just as much
as when you feel good,” and “You cry all you need to, honey.”
• Your sadness, anger, and fear are signs of being human.
Emotion dismissing, on the other hand, teaches you that
• You should ignore subtle or lower-intensity emotions—they’re irrelevant.
• Negative emotions are toxic, dangerous to yourself and the people around you.
• Negative feelings are a choice, something you could select in the morning like part of
your outﬁt. Because they’re a choice, negative emotions may be punished—even if there
is no overt misbehavior.
• “Get over it,” “Be grateful for all the good things,” or “C’mon, give me a smile, honey!”
• Your sadness, anger, and fear are signs of failure—either your own or your family’s.
In other words, emotion coaching teaches you that feelings are
tunnels, and you can allow yourself to go through the darkness to get to
the light. Emotion dismissing, on the other hand, teaches you that

[PDF page 283]

feelings aren’t a tunnel, they’re a cave . . . with a river of cyanide . . . and
a thousand rats . . . in the dark. Where you’ll be trapped forever. So
whatever you do, KEEP OUT.
Lots of families use both styles, depending on the context or the
speciﬁc emotion. And bear in mind that emotion dismissing is often
lovingly intended. “Don’t cry, honey,” seems like a thoroughly
benevolent sentiment, motivated by a desire to help someone who is
suﬀering to feel better. But underneath “Don’t cry, honey,” is a subtle
hint that the feelings are unwelcome. That you’re making other people
uncomfortable. That it would be easier for everyone if you just didn’t feel
that, so please stop.
But uncomfortable feelings happen. They are the normal, healthy
response to negative life events. When you experience an injustice,
anger happens. When you experience a loss, sadness happens. When
you experience obstacles in your progress toward a goal, frustration
happens. When you experience a threat, fear happens. And even if you
only anticipate any of these things, you may very well experience the
emotion, and it will be just as uncomfortable as if the thing were actually
happening.
Things that happen also end. Every single time, as long as you don’t
slam on the brakes to stop yourself from going through the tunnel.
nonjudging: tips for beginners
If you got lucky and had a family that taught you how to go through the
tunnel, that’s great! You can apply the same skill to your sexual well-
being. If your family was more like mine, then you might need some tips
for learning to walk through the tunnel, when, as far as your brain is
concerned, you’re just going deeper and deeper into the cave. Here are
three ways to think about nonjudging that I’ve seen women use
eﬀectively:
• Remember that feelings are biological cycles with a beginning, a middle, and an end,
built in. You believed me when I said it earlier, right? When we got chased by a lion? And
the kid came out from under anesthesia? Feeling an emotion won’t get you trapped
forever in that emotion; on the contrary, it will allow you to move through it, like a tunnel. It
might not be fun, but it’s not dangerous. Your body knows how to do it. All you have to do
is allow it.

[PDF page 284]

• Some people ﬁnd it helpful to think about allowing feelings in the same way they allow
themselves to pee and poop. It’s built into the system. You don’t tell yourself you shouldn’t
have to pee, you just wait for an appropriate time and place. And if your need to pee is
urgent, you seek out an appropriate context. Same goes for feelings. They’re a natural
part of being human, built into our biology. Cultural rules mean we can’t just feel our
feeling anywhere we want, but we can ﬁnd an appropriate time and place.
• The ﬂock metaphor from chapter 8: Nonjudging is allowing the birds in the ﬂock to ﬂy
away from a predator. Sometimes people are afraid that if they let those birds ﬂy away,
they’ll ﬂy away from the predator forever. But that’s not how the system works. Once the
birds have escaped from the predator (or noticed spontaneously that there is no predator
after all), they’ll transition back to ﬂying toward the magnetic pole along with their
neighbors. But if you don’t allow them to ﬂy away—if you say to yourself, “I shouldn’t have
that feeling,” and slam on the brake—that’s like trying to cage the birds who are trying to
escape. And how will those birds react? They’ll freak out, batter themselves against the
bars, desperate to escape both the predator and the cage. Allow them to escape and trust
that they’ll rejoin the ﬂock.
Finally, a suggestion: Start small. Most mindfulness or other
meditation training starts with paying attention to something simple, like
your breath or eating a raisin. The smell and taste of a raisin are
straightforward and nonthreatening, compared to the sensation of anger
or shame or grief. Learning to notice how a raisin smells, tastes, and
feels in your mouth builds a platform on which you can begin to
experience more complicated and diﬃcult sensations with the same
attentive neutrality—nonjudging.
What says, “You are awesome in bed!” more clearly than your
partner’s orgasm?
Your partner not being able to stop themselves from having an
orgasm—especially if that partner has a slightly stubborn
accelerator.
Camilla thought through the “If I make you a pizza and you only
eat one slice, how does that make me feel?” problem logically and
came to a smart conclusion:
They made a rule against her having orgasm.
They could do anything else they wanted, but Camilla wasn’t
allowed to have any orgasms. It’s a reverse psychology trick that
you’d never expect to work in real life—“You don’t want to have an
orgasm? Fine. You’re not allowed to have an orgasm!”—but it
actually does.

[PDF page 285]

The rule did two things. First, it genuinely took away
performance pressure from Camilla and frustrated expectations
from Henry. They could both relax and forget about it, which made
them both feel better.
It had another impact, too. Henry had already shifted the way he
thought about foreplay and was thinking of their entire relationship
as an opportunity to tease Camilla’s ticking pilot light. The new
rule took that to another level.
See, taking orgasm oﬀ the table put Camilla’s little monitor in a
puzzling situation. If Henry was, say, going down on her, and she
felt so aroused that she thought she might have an orgasm, she’d
remember that she wasn’t supposed to have an orgasm, and then
the little monitor would keep checking her arousal level and
comparing it with her goal state of not having an orgasm, which
means her monitor would keep thinking about orgasm and how
close she was to it.
Embedded in the thought “Don’t have an orgasm” is “. . . have
an orgasm.” And if I say to you, “Don’t think about a bear,” what’s
the ﬁrst thing that happens?
Orgasms aren’t as automatic as thoughts, but in the right, sex-
positive context, if you make orgasm against the rules and then
give the person a lot of time to try not to have an orgasm . . . I’ll
just say it’s a fun game and you might want to try it sometime.
Which brings me to the orgasm your partner can’t stop
themselves from having.
Henry is just about as smart as Camilla. I know this because
one day she called me and said that he had stuck to their
agreement better than she had—he was using a vibrator on her
and she had been close and actually wanted to have an orgasm,
but he stopped before she got there.
She was frustrated. And even a little pissed. But hey, the rule
was her idea. He was being a gentleman.
He did this two more times—got her close, then backed oﬀ.
Because he is such a gentleman.
And eventually he got her so close that she genuinely couldn’t
stop herself from having an orgasm. Which is a neat trick—women
don’t have a “point of no return” for orgasm the way men do for
ejaculation. To get a woman to be unable to stop herself from
coming takes a high level of persistent arousal.

[PDF page 286]

And yes, again, being a sex educator is the best job in the world
when people tell you stories like this.
“no good reason”
Here’s an emotion-dismissing meta-emotion I hear a lot: “If there is no
solution to an uncomfortable feeling, there’s no point feeling it.”
Yes, there is.
The point of feeling a feeling you can’t do anything about is to let it
discharge, complete the cycle, so that it can end.
I was talking about the nonjudgment research with my colleague Jan,
and she told me she’d had a relevant experience over the weekend. She
had noticed herself getting disproportionately enraged about a small
thing—losing a stamp when she was trying to mail a letter—and she
later made the connection that her anger wasn’t really about the stamp.
The anger had been activated the night before, when she watched a
movie about a misogynist jerk, which triggered her own history with a
misogynist jerk from two decades ago.
“So what did you do with the anger?” I asked.
“I told myself I didn’t need to feel angry, because the jerk is gone from
my life now.”
“You judged? You hit the brakes?”
“What else was I supposed to do? Be mad at a guy I haven’t seen in
twenty years?”
The threat—the misogynist jerk—wasn’t around anymore to ﬁght
against or run away from . . . and yet she still had these feelings. So
what could she do with them?
She could complete the cycle. The Feels exist in her body, without
reference to the jerk whom she successfully left behind.
But this is not the habit most of us learn early in our lives, and it takes
practice. When we have feelings we can’t really do anything about and
we don’t know how to let ourselves simply feel without doing anything,
our brains will look for some situation it can do something about, and it
will try to impose the feelings on that situation.
So don’t be mad at the guy who’s long gone. Just allow the anger to
move through you. It doesn’t matter what it’s about, it’s just random
Feels, left over from the past, that have to work themselves out. Don’t hit
the gas pedal, but don’t hit the brake either. Notice the anger and allow

[PDF page 287]

it. Be still, and it will blow through you like a hot desert wind or a
typhoon.
healing trauma with nonjudging
When a person experiences trauma, it’s like someone snuck into their
garden and ripped out all the plants they had been cultivating with such
care and attention. This is particularly awful when the person who tears
up the garden is not a stranger but someone the person trusted. There
is rage and betrayal, there is grief for the garden as it was, and there is
fear that it will never grow back.
But it will grow back. That’s what gardens do.
And you facilitate that growth by allowing the garden to be what it is,
in process, rather than what it was or what you wish it were. How? Self-
compassion: self-kindness, common humanity, and mindfulness.
Patience. Feeling okay with feeling not-okay.
Healing hurts. If you break your leg, there is no stage in the healing
process when your leg feels better than it does after it has healed. There
is pain and itching and loss of strength. From the moment your leg is
broken, it continues to feel bad . . . until, gradually, it starts to feel less
bad. It’s appropriate that it hurts.
If you numb physical pain, healing can still happen. Alas, if we try to
“numb” emotional pain, we get a break from the pain . . . but the healing
is put on pause, too. People who are more evolved than I am can go
through emotions like grief and panic without suﬀering, but for most of
us, heart healing doesn’t happen without suﬀering. Sorry.
I recently worked with a survivor of sexual violence who was early in
her healing process. She was by turns angry and despairing and frozen
—and she was afraid all the time. Though she had been practicing
meditation for a long time, the intensity of her emotions felt too big for
her to allow them to move through her; they bottlenecked inside her. She
felt panicked and stuck in the pain. She wanted to know what to do with
all the feelings, how to ﬁx them. She wanted to know how to stop hurting
and how soon the pain would end.
“All I can tell you,” I said, “is that everything you’re experiencing, all
the contradictory feelings and all the pain, is a normal part of the healing
process. Everyone goes through it diﬀerently, and there’s no way to
know how long it will last. It sucks for a while, and then gradually it gets

[PDF page 288]

better. But I can tell you this for sure: Every single survivor I’ve ever
known has found their way through it.”
We sat in silence while she absorbed the idea of not knowing when
the pain would end and having to simply trust her body and her heart to
heal in their own time. At last she said, “It’s like . . . I’m sitting with a
stunned bird in the palm of my hand. If I get tense and try to hurry it, it
will just stay frozen. But if I’m still and patient long enough, the bird will
wake up and ﬂy away.”
Yes. That.
when partners dismiss!
I see it all the time. People hear me talk about emotion coaching and
then tell me about all the ways their partner dismisses their feelings.
They ask what they can do about it. I’ve found there are two especially
important ground rules for couples when it comes to communicating
about sex.
Neither of you chose your feelings—but both of you choose how you
feel about those feelings. One of the most problematic messages in
emotion dismissing meta-emotions is that emotional reactions are a
choice. Like you’re “choosing” to have responsive desire or “choosing”
not to have orgasms with intercourse.
But you don’t choose that stuﬀ. You didn’t choose the brain chemistry
you were born with, you didn’t choose the family or the culture you were
born into, and you don’t choose what your body does today in response
to sexually relevant stimuli.
What you can choose is how you feel about all of that—and so can
your partner. And feeling okay with it is what makes the diﬀerence. If
you’re in a relationship where one partner wants sex more than the
other, it is seriously unhelpful if one partner feels that the other is
“choosing” their desire level. Remember the chasing dynamic from
chapter 7?
What you do choose is compassion—or not. Patience—or not. With
both yourself and your partner. When you ﬁnd yourself stuck in a
frustrating argument about sex, ask out loud, “Are we both choosing
compassion and patience right now?” (Hint: You can’t make someone
be patient any more than you can make someone have an orgasm. You
create a great context, and then allow it to happen.)

[PDF page 289]

Feelings aren’t dangerous . . . though they can be used dangerously.
One of the central messages in emotion dismissing meta-emotions is
that feelings are inherently dangerous—toxic and hurtful to yourself and
the people around you. People may believe this if they grew up in a
world where people used feelings to injure or manipulate others—and
using your feelings to deliberately hurt people is against the rules. Most
important: You’re not allowed to use your own feelings to injure or
manipulate yourself! (Self-compassion!)
Nor are you allowed to use them to injure or manipulate your partner
or others—and other people, including your partner, aren’t allowed to
use them against you, either.
But feeling your Feels is safe. Being emotionally uncomfortable isn’t
inherently dangerous. It’s not even scary—when you trust that allowing
the discomfort to move through its cycle will always and inevitably end in
feeling better.
Witnessing your partner’s Feels may feel uncomfortable for you; it
may activate your desire to Make Your Partner Feel Better or Fix the
Problem. That’s normal, that’s okay. Remember that the way to make
someone feel better and ﬁx the problem is to allow the person to move
all the way through the tunnel, complete the cycle. This is not a stimulus-
response kind of problem—like “IF Partner Is Crying, THEN Cheer
Partner Up Instantly.” No. If your partner is crying or otherwise having
an intense emotional experience, remember it’s their sleepy hedgehog,
and your job is to listen for what the hedgehog needs while allowing your
partner to complete the cycle.
Being afraid of feelings or being angry about them—your own or your
partner’s—only increases the fear and anger in your relationship, which
makes your sex life worse. Being nonjudging about the feelings creates
a space where your partner can complete the cycle and thus get the
heck out of the way of your conﬁdence, joy, and ecstasy.
Remember the sleepy hedgehog. It doesn’t help either you or your
Feels if you shove them in your partner’s face and say, “ACCEPT THIS!”
How would you respond if your partner did that to you? Unless you’re a
saint of unrivaled patience and tolerance, you would get defensive—and
fair enough. Shoving your Feels in your partner’s face is using your
feelings as a weapon, and that’s never okay.
There are excellent books about how to listen to your partner and how
to manage feelings in a relationship. In chapter 4, I recommended Love
Sense by Sue Johnson, and to that recommendation I’ll add What

[PDF page 290]

Makes Love Last? How to Build Trust and Avoid Betrayal by John
Gottman and Nan Silver.
inﬂuencing the little monitor part 1: changing your criterion
velocity
Now that we’ve identiﬁed the biggest barrier to changing meta-emotions
—the pit of despair that’s triggered by letting go of the old goal—and
we’ve learned the best way through that barrier—nonjudging so you can
complete the cycle—let’s get practical.
If you’re dissatisﬁed with your sexual functioning, there are three
targets for “teaching” your monitor: the goal, the amount or kind of eﬀort
you invest, and the criterion velocity—your assessment of how eﬀortful it
should be to achieve this goal.
Let’s start with changing your criterion velocity.
Plenty of women experience this when they decide to have a baby.
They have a goal—a fantastically desirable magnetic pole for their ﬂock
to ﬂy toward—and so their interest in sex may skyrocket for a while. But
if many months pass without success, they begin to feel frustrated and
worried, and then enraged or fearful . . . and then they drop oﬀ the
criterion velocity cliﬀ, into despair. Realistic expectations can make all
the diﬀerence—for instance, it’s normal for it to take six months to a year
for a couple to get pregnant, and 15 percent of couples don’t conceive
within that ﬁrst year. Adjusting your expectations about how eﬀortful it
will be frees you to enjoy the sex you’re having and to open your mind to
whether exploring other approaches to parenthood might be a better
“kind of eﬀort.”
On the ﬂip side, adjusting your expectations of how normal it is to
experience pain can allow you to seek eﬀective help. I had a chance to
talk with Caroline Pukall, coauthor, with Andrew Goldstein and Irwin
Goldstein, of When Sex Hurts: A Woman’s Guide to Banishing Sexual
Pain. She pointed out that some women tolerate pain with sex “just
because they have this belief that, ‘I guess some pain is to be
expected.’ ”
She went on, “There’s something about women bearing pain longer
than they need to,” perhaps in other domains of their life, as well as in
sex. They tolerate pain because they think that is their only option, that
eﬀective treatments aren’t available (they are!), or that the hassle of

[PDF page 291]

seeking treatment isn’t worth the potential beneﬁt (it is!). And medical
professionals sometimes reinforce this tendency by not taking pain
seriously or assuming that if there is no infection or injury, the pain is “all
in her head.”
If women (and their medical providers) had the same criterion velocity
about female genital pain that men have about male genital pain, they
would never hesitate to seek treatment. The willingness to tolerate
greater eﬀort—in this case, pain—is learned. And it can be changed,
simply by becoming aware of it and allowing the possibility that it could
be diﬀerent.
Pain is a signal that your body needs help. If you use your own
internal experience, rather than culturally imposed criterion velocities, as
your most accurate source of knowledge about sex, you’ll be able to
hear your body’s signal that it needs help, and you’ll take it seriously.
This is as literal as it gets: It’s not how you feel (pain). It’s how you
feel (tolerant or not) about how you feel.
When Little Monitors Should Be Impatient!
This is the kind of story that ﬁlls me with righteous anger. A woman in a wheelchair
approached me after a public talk and told me that my presentation was the ﬁrst time she
had ever heard that there are eﬀective treatments for vaginismus, chronic tension of the
pelvic ﬂoor muscle that makes penetration of the vagina either impossible or very painful.
Her doctors had never mentioned that her vaginismus might be treatable.
Why didn’t they tell her? Was it because the doctors didn’t know? Was it because they
didn’t feel comfortable talking about sex with any twenty-something woman? Was it
because it didn’t occur to them that a woman in a wheelchair has just as much right to a
satisfying sex life as any other woman? I don’t know. But I can’t help wondering if those
doctors would have ignored complaints of sexual dysfunction and pain from a twenty-
something man in a wheelchair.
inﬂuencing the little monitor part 2: changing the kind of eﬀort
I have a big “Demotivator” poster on the wall in my oﬃce, featuring a
photo of a penguin waddling away from the camera, and this caption:
LIMITATIONS
Until you spread your wings, you’ll have no idea how far you can walk.

[PDF page 292]

It’s a joke, obviously, but I bought it when I was writing my
dissertation because I actually found it highly motivating. Anytime I
bumped up against an unexpected challenge, or anytime a challenge
turned out to be more diﬃcult than I anticipated, that waddling penguin
reminded me that I would ﬁnd a way around or through it. If I couldn’t get
there by ﬂying, I’d get there some by other method, even if I had to walk
the whole way.
If there is somewhere you want to go and it turns out your plan for
getting there won’t work, that doesn’t mean you can’t go there or that
you shouldn’t try; it just means you’ll have to get there some other way. If
you would like your sexual wellbeing to be diﬀerent from how it is now—
whether that means repairing some damage or expanding into
extraordinary ecstasy—you may just need to change the kind of eﬀort
you’re putting into the goal.
If your goal is orgasm during intercourse, it’s helpful to know that only
about a quarter of women are reliably orgasmic from penetration alone
—that fact can change your criterion velocity—but it’s more helpful to
know that clitoral stimulation is often a more eﬀective path to orgasm. To
have an orgasm during intercourse, change the kind of eﬀort you’re
investing: Add clitoral stimulation. You can do this with your own hand,
your partner’s hand, a vibrator, or by grinding your pubic bone against
their pubic bone.
If your goal is spontaneous desire, knowing that spontaneous desire
is comparatively rare helps change your criterion velocity, but knowing
how to create a highly sex-positive context lets you invest the most
eﬀective kind of eﬀort. The best contexts, as we’ve seen, involve turning
on all the ons and turning oﬀ all the oﬀs. Or, to switch metaphors, dig out
the weeds of sex-negative culture from your garden. Go back to your
worksheets and see what aspects of your context you might be able to
change, to create a context that promotes both enjoying and eagerness.
And practicing the skill of nonjudging is the most fundamental new
eﬀort you can invest in improving your sexual functioning. If your family
and culture planted things in your garden that you want to dig out and
replace with something new, nonjudging is the tool that will allow you to
stand quietly in your garden and watch the weeds die, even the weeds
you were taught to cherish and nurture. Allow the weeds to die, for the
sake of the whole garden.

[PDF page 293]

Merritt is the queen of not doing it the way you expect her to. She
began to trust herself not when she could give herself pleasure,
but when she could give her partner pleasure. She embraced
herself as a sexual woman . . . when she allowed herself not to be
sexual. She sank down in the light of intense pleasure . . . when
she let go of trying to experience pleasure.
“It’s like how your ﬁngers feel when you come in from the cold. It
hurts for a while, but then they’re warm.” That’s how she described
the experience of letting go of the sexuality she thought she was
supposed to have and opening up space for the sexuality she did
have. “You’d think a middle-aged lesbian would know better than
to accept what the world says about how women’s sexuality
works. But letting go of all that is hard.”
“You’ve got a sensitive brake,” I said, “and you’ve probably had
that brake a lot longer than you’ve had feminist politics.”
One last story:
Merritt and Carol got married not long after their daughter
graduated from high school. That kid—a peer sex educator in her
high school, of course—organized a bridal shower for her moms
that included, among the more pragmatic gifts of garden store gift
cards and new towels, a kit from their daughter containing
sparkling cider, scented candles, and massage oil, in a pretty
basket with a bow.
“I can’t believe my child is giving her parents date night
paraphernalia,” Merritt said.
“Oh, puh-lease. It’s not like I’m giving you a dildo and a whip!”
At this Merritt and Carol, both red faced and laughing, tried to
send her to the kitchen to do the dishes.
But their daughter continued, “I mean, come on, it’s the twenty-
ﬁrst century. You’re here, you’re queer, you get naked together
sometimes because you’re in love with each other. Get used to it.”
Which is exactly what she’s been doing ever since, side by side
with Carol.
inﬂuencing the little monitor part 3: changing the goal
In chapter 8, I talked about ways to change the goal state to improve
orgasm. When you replace the goal of orgasm with the goal of pleasure,

[PDF page 294]

you shift your little monitor’s attention to a new and highly accessible
target, yet one that may carry a lot of negative meta-feelings for you.
That’s normal. If you notice resistance inside yourself to the idea of
valuing pleasure over orgasm, just notice it, step to one side, and allow
the frustration to transition into grief, as your little monitor lets go of the
old goal, and then allow the grief to open the door to pleasure.
In chapter 7, I talked about ways to change the goal to improve sexual
desire, too. Letting go of the goal of spontaneous desire and allowing
yourself to be responsive or context sensitive satisﬁes your little monitor
and opens up the opportunity of seeking out contexts that maximize your
desire style. Again, cultural baggage may cause you to feel attached to
the idea that spontaneous desire is better than responsive desire. Notice
the urge to hold fast to the ideal of spontaneous desire and allow
yourself to move through the tunnel. Anytime judgment of context-
sensitive desire emerges inside you, practice noticing the judgment
without agreeing or disagreeing. Just acknowledge it and allow it to
move through you and out of you.
I also described changing the goal in terms of nonconcordant arousal,
in chapter 6. Concordance isn’t likely to create signiﬁcant change in your
sexual satisfaction. Instead, the goal is to recognize that
nonconcordance happens sometimes, use lube if your vaginal
secretions aren’t there when you need them, and teach your partner to
listen to your words. Again, there are cultural misunderstandings and
judgments about nonconcordance, so you may ﬁnd that you need to
release negative meta-emotions around it. It’s the same basic process:
Allow those feelings to complete their cycles and release them to create
space for the new goal.9
When I teach about choosing a goal, people sometimes assume that
the biggest challenge is choosing the right goal. But that’s actually pretty
simple (though not always easy). The right goal is whatever is true
about you right now. Collapse the distance between your goal state and
your present state. The goal is to be just what you are, right now.
“to feel normal”
The challenge in changing the goal is not the what, but the how: How do
you let go of the old goal and feel really good about where you are right
now?

[PDF page 295]

Take Ms. B. from the beginning of the chapter. What do you think her
goal is? Is it pleasure? Connection with her partner? Self-discovery?
From what little we know of her (and from what we know of the way
women are socialized around sex), it seems likely that her unconscious
goal is to conform to the expected ideal. To have desire come
spontaneously, to have orgasms during intercourse. In short, to feel
“normal.”
We know by now that there’s no such thing as normal—or rather, that
we’re all normal. We’re all made of the same parts as everyone else,
organized in a unique way. No two alike.
And yet what most of us want is to feel normal.
(In fact, one of the normal things about your sexuality is to worry
sometimes about whether you’re normal. Yes, being worried about
being normal is . . . normal.)
Why is normal the goal? What do people really want when they want
to be normal?
I think that to feel normal is to feel that you belong. Remember what
Camilla said way back in chapter 1: “We’re all just trying to belong
somewhere.” We want to know that we are safe within the bounds of
shared human experience, that what’s on our map is the same as what
is on other people’s maps.
If we ﬁnd ourselves in a place that we can’t ﬁnd on our map—that is, if
we have an experience for which we have no frame of reference, no
script—we feel lost. Unknown territory feels risky, unsafe—remember
from chapter 4: “I am lost/I am home.” In unknown territory, we feel, “I
am at risk!” Our stress response kicks in and we’re like that Iggy Pop
rat: Everything seems like a potential threat.
But then if someone comes along and says, “You’re okay—see, I’ve
got this place here on my map. This is deﬁnitely part of the territory,” we
can relax. We know we’re still at home, safe within bounds. We belong
here.
When people ask me, “Am I normal?” they’re asking, “Do I belong?”
The answer is yes. You belong in your body. You belong in the world.
You’ve belonged since the day you were born, this is your home. You
don’t have to earn it by conforming to some externally imposed sexual
standard.
If you change your goal to “wherever I belong,” then you’re always
successful because you’re already there.

[PDF page 296]

“this is it”
I have a small comic taped to my oﬃce door. It shows an old Buddhist
monk sitting next to a young Buddhist monk. The older monk is saying,
“Nothing happens next. This is it.”
Being more nerd than nun, I see it as a commentary on the
discrepancy-reducing feedback loop and criterion velocity, on the
importance of training your little monitor to enjoy the present rather than
constantly push toward the future. I remind myself every time I walk into
my oﬃce, “This is it. Right now.”
What if . . . this is a radical idea, but just go with me: What if you felt
that way—“This is it”—about your sexual functioning? What if the
sexuality you have right now is the sexuality you get? What if this is it?
When I pose that question, women have a tremendously wide range
of responses, from radiantly beaming smiles to sudden waves of
sobbing despair.
If you beam radiantly at the idea that your sexuality, as it is now, is it,
awesome. I hope the science in this book will help to expand and
enliven your sexual wellbeing.
If you would feel grief, shame, despair, rage, uncertainty, frustration,
or fear if the sexuality you have today were it for your sexuality, this is for
you:
The day you were born, the world had a choice about what to teach
you about your body. It could have taught you to live with conﬁdence
and joy inside your body. It could have taught you that your body and
your sexuality are beautiful gifts. But instead, the world taught you to feel
critical of and dissatisﬁed with your sexuality and your body. You were
taught to value and expect something from your sexuality that does not
match what your sexuality actually is. You were told a story about what
would happen in your sexual life, and that story was false. You were lied
to. I am pissed, on your behalf, at the world for that lie. And I’m working
to create a world that doesn’t lie to women about their bodies anymore.
I can’t change the injury that the world inﬂicted on you, and neither
can you.
What you can do is heal.
Like your genitals, your sexuality is perfect and beautiful exactly as it
is. You are normal. Beautiful. And as long as you’re not experiencing
pain, you’re healthy. So when you notice yourself feeling dissatisﬁed
with your sexuality, when you notice shame or frustration or grief, allow

[PDF page 297]

yourself to direct those feelings away from yourself and instead focus
the emotions toward the culture that told you the wrong story. Rage not
against yourself but against the culture that lied to you. Grieve not for
your discrepancy from a ﬁctitious “ideal” that is at best arbitrary and at
worst an act of oppression and violence; grieve for the compassionate
world you were born deserving . . . and did not get.
The purpose of allowing yourself to feel those Feels is not to change
something out in the world. Feel your Feels so that they can discharge,
release, and create space for something new inside you. When you
allow that grief to move through you, you are letting go of the sexual
person you were told you “should be,” a phantom self that has taken up
space in your mind for too long. And letting go of that phantom creates
spaces for the sexual person you are. And when we all practice this, the
world does change, person by person.
The sexuality you have right now is it. And it’s beautiful, even—
especially!—if it’s not what you were taught it should be.
I don’t know if you’re more like Olivia or Camilla or Merritt or Laurie, or
nothing at all like any woman I’ve ever met. I don’t know how easily you
discover and create contexts that generate pleasure and desire. I don’t
know how at home you feel in your sexuality, your own private garden.
But I know that you are the gardener. And I know that the more you work
with the innate characteristics of your garden, the healthier and more
abundant it will grow. I know you are beautiful just as you are, fully
capable of conﬁdent, joyful sex. I know you are normal.
Laurie and Johnny lived happily ever after—or most of the time
ever after. Life is complicated and Laurie still has times when she
gets sucked into exhaustion and overwhelm, times when her body
seems to shut out all potential sources of pleasure. But three
things changed permanently.
First, she practiced paying nonjudgmental attention to
sensations, which taught her to be as kind and generous with
herself as she was with everyone else she loved. She learned to
notice and celebrate pleasure and joy, granting herself permission
to feel good.
Second, though there wasn’t much she could do to reduce the
actual stressors in her life, she reduced her stress by taking more
deliberate eﬀort to decompress and complete the stress response
cycles that life activated. She let herself cry. She slowed down her

[PDF page 298]

showers, paid attention to the sensation of the water on her skin,
and instead of slapping on body lotion like she was greasing a loaf
pan, she paid attention to how nice it felt and how healthy her skin
was. As she exercised, she visualized her stress as that orange
monster in the Bugs Bunny cartoon—the one Bugs gives a
manicure—and imagines herself running away from the monster,
through her front door, and into Johnny’s arms. She started
experiencing the discharge of stress as pleasurable—or at least
not a source of suﬀering.
And ﬁnally, she became much gentler with herself when she
noticed herself being self-critical about her body or feeling guilty
about pleasure. She didn’t say to herself, “Stop it!” She just
thought, “Yup. There are the self-critical thoughts again.” She
practiced nonjudgment.
Perhaps these three changes would not have lasted as they
have if it weren’t for Johnny recognizing the opportunity in all of
this.
Once he clicked onto the idea of turning oﬀ her oﬀs, he started
noticing more and more things he could do to help Laurie let go of
the brakes. Sometimes it was a simple thing like doing the dishes
and wiping down the kitchen counters. Sometimes it was, “Let’s
take a night oﬀ of worrying about whether we’re going to have sex
and just lie together and talk.” Sometimes it was setting up a date
night with plenty of time for her to unwind.
Higher-desire partners might think, “She should just be able to
want it as much as I do!” They have negative meta-feelings about
their partner’s sexual feelings. But Johnny realized it’s not about
just wanting sex, it’s about creating a context—really, it’s about
creating a life—that makes space for both people’s needs. He
brought a sense of curiosity to the puzzle of turning oﬀ the oﬀs. He
brought a sense of wonder to the surprising way Laurie’s sexuality
can spring and blossom from fallow winter ground. He brought a
sense of awe to the ecstatic way her passion overﬂows the garden
walls, under the loving warm rain and sun of the right context.
It’s not how you feel. It’s how you feel about how you feel.
tl;dr

[PDF page 299]

• The most important thing you can do to have a great sex life is to welcome your sexuality
as it is, right now—even if it’s not what you wanted or expected it to be.
• Letting go of old, bogus cultural standards requires a grieving process, going through the
little monitor’s pit of despair.
•  To facilitate that letting go, develop nonjudging “emotion-coaching” meta-emotions.
Recognize that feelings are a normal part of life, and when bad things happen, it’s normal
to feel angry, fearful, or sad.
• When you give yourself permission to be and feel whatever you are and feel, your body
can complete the cycle, move through the tunnel, and come out to the light at the end.

[PDF page 300]

conclusion
YOU ARE THE SECRET INGREDIENT
So what have we learned?
We’ve learned that we’re all made of the same parts, organized in
diﬀerent ways—no two alike. That sexual arousal is the process of both
turning on the ons and turning oﬀ the oﬀs. That context—your
environment and your mental state—inﬂuences how and when the ons
and oﬀs activate.
We’ve learned that genital response and sexual arousal aren’t always
the same thing. That desire can be spontaneous or responsive, and
both are normal. That some women orgasm pretty reliably from
intercourse, most don’t, both are normal, and neither is a bigger deal
than you want it to be.
Above all, we’ve learned that it’s not how your sexuality functions but
how you feel about how your sexuality functions that determines
whether your sex life is characterized by worry and distress . . . or by
conﬁdence and joy.
To get there, we’ve discussed anatomy, physiology, behavioral and
comparative psychology, evolutionary psychology, health psychology,
moral psychology, gender studies, media studies, and more. I’ve used
metaphors, stories, my twenty years of experience as an educator, and
a century or more of science.
The depth and complexity of women’s sexuality demand all this, and
more.
why I wrote this book
Like many of you, I was taught all the wrong things as I was growing up.
Then as I reached adulthood, I made all the mistakes. And I spent many
years stumbling with unspeakably good fortune into settings where I
could learn how to get it “right”—settings like the Kinsey Institute and

[PDF page 301]

one of only a handful of Ph.D. programs with a formal concentration in
human sexuality.
I wrote this book to share what I’ve learned—what has helped me and
what I’ve seen help other women. I wrote it for my sister and my mother,
for my sister’s young adult stepdaughters, for my niece who is just
approaching adolescence, and most of all for my students. I wrote it to
share the science that taught me that I and my sister and my mother and
my friends are all normal and healthy. I wrote it to grant us all permission
to be diﬀerent from one another.
I wrote it because I am done living in a world where women are lied to
about their bodies; where women are objects of sexual desire but not
subjects of sexual pleasure; where sex is used as a weapon against
women; and where women believe their bodies are broken, simply
because those bodies are not male. And I am done living in a world
where women are trained from birth to treat their bodies as the enemy.
I wrote this book to teach women to live with conﬁdence and joy.
If you can remember even one of the ideas in this book—no two alike,
brakes and accelerator, context, nonconcordant arousal, responsive
desire, any of them—and use it to improve your relationship with your
own sexuality, you’ll be helping me with that goal. And if you share any
of these ideas with even one other person, you’ll be expanding the
global space in which women can live with conﬁdence and joy.
In a way, it’s a small goal. I’m not trying to prevent cancer or solve the
climate crisis or build peace in the Middle East. I’m just trying to help
people live with conﬁdence and joy inside their bodies—and maybe, just
maybe, if enough people are able to achieve this, we can ultimately live
in a world where everyone’s sexual autonomy is respected.
Do I think that living with conﬁdence and joy and respecting
everyone’s sexual autonomy could play a role in preventing cancer,
solving the climate crisis, or building world peace? Yes, actually. But
that’s another story.
where to look for more answers
I don’t have all the answers—I don’t even have half the answers. The
science is constantly growing and expanding, so more insight, more
clarity will come. In this book I’ve presented some of the answers that

[PDF page 302]

I’ve seen help women, and I hope I’ve done it in a way that heals and
renews and expands your sexuality.
All of us are engaged in the ongoing process of cultivating our
gardens—digging out the weeds and nurturing the plants we hope will
ﬂourish. Often it’s a joyful experience; sometimes it’s painful; always it’s
deeply personal. And as we tend our gardens, all of us look outside
ourselves for conﬁrmation that what we are experiencing is normal. We
look to our community for comfort when we’re distressed. We look to
experts for answers we can’t ﬁnd on our own. Everyone does it, from the
toddler who falls down while she’s learning to walk to the gifted
meditator feeling her way through recovery from a sexual assault. We all
look up from our own experience, look out to the world, and say, “That
hurt. Am I okay? Am I doing this right?”
(You are doing it right. You are okay. When you hurt, you heal.)
And in the same way that our stress response physiology made a lot
of sense when our typical stressors had sharp teeth and claws, so this
practice of looking outside ourselves for conﬁrmation that we’re okay
may have made more sense when “outside ourselves” meant our local
community and people we actually knew in real life, rather than people
we know only through mass media.
We live in a Top 5 Tips world, where there are twelve new techniques
for mind-blowing fellatio each month, followed by six sexy new positions
he’s always wanted to try. This world is full of fun, exciting, entertaining
things that draw and hold our attention.
But the structure of the truth is quieter, slower, more personal, and so
much more interesting than mere entertainment. And it lives exclusively
inside you, in the quiet moments of joy, in the jarring moments of worry,
in the torn moments when the ﬂock that is you is trying simultaneously to
ﬂy away from a threat and toward a pleasure.
So when you notice something unexpected inside yourself and you
want to look outward to check if it’s normal, if you’re okay, remember
me saying this: You are okay. Let this book be a mirror: When you look
up, see yourself. And you are beautiful.
Trust your body.
Listen to the small, quiet voice inside you that says, “Yes! More!” or
“No. Stop.” Listen especially when that voice is saying both at once.
When that happens, be compassionate with yourself. Go slow.
When you look “out there,” you’ll ﬁnd inspiration and entertainment
and amazing science and support, too. But you won’t ﬁnd the truth of

[PDF page 303]

your own sexual wellbeing—what you want, what you like, what you
need. To ﬁnd that, look inside.
I think very often people follow a blog like the one I write, take a class
like the ones I teach, or read a book like this one, hoping to ﬁnd the
secret ingredient, the hidden all-powerful something or other that will put
the apparent chaos of their sex lives into some kind of meaningful order.
So, what is the secret ingredient?
Well.
Have you seen the movie Kung Fu Panda?
It’s about a cartoon panda named Po, who becomes a kung fu master
through diligent eﬀort, the support of his teacher, and the wisdom of the
Dragon Scroll, which contains “the key to limitless power”—in other
words, the secret ingredient.
When Po ﬁrst looks at the scroll, he is disappointed to ﬁnd that there is
nothing written on it. It’s a mirror—it reﬂects his own face.
And then comes his epiphany: “There is no secret ingredient. It’s just
you.”
So. One more time, for the record:
Yes, you are normal. In fact, you’re not just normal. You’re amazing.
Beguiling. Courageous. Delectable. All the way down to yawping and
zesty. Your body is beautiful and your desires are perfect, just as they
are.
The secret ingredient is you.
The science says so.
And now you can prove it.

[PDF page 304]

acknowledgments
Gratitude, ﬁrst of all, to all the women who’ve talked to me about their sex lives, whose stories
are woven into the narratives of Camilla, Olivia, Merritt, and Laurie, and throughout the book. I
hope I have done justice to your stories.
Gratitude to the researchers, educators, and counselors who talked to me, read chunks of the
book, told me I didn’t sound like a nut, told me I did sound like a nut, and/or nodded
sympathetically as I apologized about the diﬀerence between writing science itself and writing
about science for a general audience. In alphabetical order: Kent Berridge, Charles Carver,
Kristen Chamberlin, Meredith Chivers, Cynthia Graham, Robin Milhausen, Caroline Pukall, and
Kelly Suchinsky. Let the record show that any mistakes in the science are my own fault, despite
precise and clear feedback from these good people.
Gratitude to Ms. Erika Moen, who drew the genitals so beautifully.
Gratitude to the beta readers, especially Andrew Wilson and Sabrina Golonka, Patrick
Kinsman, Ruth Cohen, Anna Cook, and Jan Morris.
Gratitude to readers of my blog, who read early drafts of the book, commented on posts for
four years, kept me intellectually and emotionally honest, and kept me questioning what I thought
I knew, so that I could be a better writer.
Gratitude to my students at Smith College, who asked questions I’d never considered
(“What’s the evolutionary origin of the hymen?”) and pushed me to understand ever more deeply
what I was teaching, so that I could be a better teacher.
To all of you: Thank you.
And then there’s the gratitude where there just aren’t any words anymore, all there is is this
swollen feeling around your heart and no way to talk about it. You know that feeling? It’s the one
that tells you to go to the person, get on your knees, and cover your face with your hands,
grateful, humble, bound.
I’m pretty sure that every person for whom I have this feeling would ﬁnd it very, very awkward
if I actually did that. So instead I’ll just write a list.
Here, in approximate chronological order, are the people who helped me in ways I don’t have
words for:
Nancy Nutt-Chase
Cynthia Graham and John Bancroft
Erick Janssen

[PDF page 305]

David Lohrmann
Richard Stevens
Lindsay Edgecombe
Sarah Knight
Julie Ohotnicky
Amelia Nagoski
Stephen Crowley
Grateful. Humble. Bound. Thank you.

[PDF page 306]

appendix 1: therapeutic masturbation
If you are experiencing frustration around orgasm—whether you’re learning to orgasm, learning
to orgasm with a partner, or learning to have more control over your orgasms—I oﬀer these
instructions.
1. Find your clitoris (instructions in chapter 1).
2. Create a great context. You can use your worksheets from chapters 3 and 7 to help with
this. In general, it’ll be a context where you have no concern about being interrupted for
about thirty minutes, where you feel safe and private and undistracted by outside worries.
3. Touch your body and notice how that feels. Touch your feet and legs and arms and
hands and neck and scalp. At ﬁrst, when you’re learning to have an orgasm, stop here.
Spend your thirty minutes just doing this. Do it a few times a week for a couple weeks.
Gradually incorporate your breasts, lower abdomen, inner thighs.
4. Now stimulate your clitoris indirectly. The most indirect stimulation is simply to think
about your clitoris. Just give it quiet, loving attention. Try rocking or rotating your hips, to
bring your attention to your pelvis. You may or may not notice some emotions emerging as
you attend to your clitoris. That’s normal. Allow those feelings and practice feeling
aﬀectionate and compassionate toward yourself, your genitals, and all those feelings.
When you feel ready (and you may not feel ready for days or weeks—that’s okay),
move to “distal” stimulation, which means indirect, roundabout stimulation. Try any of
these, or whatever else feels right:
• Gently pinch your labia between your thumbs and foreﬁngers, stretch the labia out,
and tug from side to side. This will put very indirect pressure on the clitoris and
move the skin over the clitoris (the clitoral hood).
• With your palm over your mons, press down a little and pull upward, toward your
abdomen. Again, this will put gentle pressure on the clit and move the skin around it.
Try diﬀerent pressures, diﬀerent speeds of tugging (e.g., one long slow tug, several
quick tugs in a row), or rotating your palm in a circle.
• Place your palms against your inner thighs, so that the outside edges of your
thumbs are pressing against your labia, possibly even squeezing them together.
Rock your hips against the pressure of your hands.

[PDF page 307]

Some people prefer indirect stimulation over direct stimulation. You may notice as you
try these techniques that the muscles in your arms, legs, butt, and/or abdomen get tense.
That’s a normal part of the arousal process. You might even ﬁnd yourself feeling like you
don’t want to stop doing a particular kind of stimulation. I humbly suggest you go with your
gut; don’t stop. Keep going for as long as it feels good, just keep paying attention to the
pleasurable sensations without trying to change them or even understand them.
5. Try direct stimulation. For most people this is pleasurable only when arousal has
already started up, so once you’re feeling pretty pleasurable and warm, try any of these:
• With the ﬂat of one or two or three ﬁngertips, lightly touch the head of the clitoris
with a steady back-and-forth motion. Try slow, fast, anything in between that feels
good, and with light, brushing touch, light pressure, deep pressure . . . try diﬀerent
combinations of speeds and pressures.
• With as many ﬁngertips as feels comfortable, rub circles directly over your clitoris
—fast or slow, light touch or deep pressure, or anything in between.
• Again with varying numbers of ﬁngers, and with diﬀerent pressures and speeds,
tug upward on the clitoris, from the clitoral hood.
• With whatever variation on ﬁngers, speed, and pressure you want to try, ﬂick
upward from just under the head of the clitoris.
As your arousal level changes, notice and observe what happens to your body. Don’t
try to make it change. If you notice that your brain starts whirring away at anxieties or
fears, notice that, too, know that you can worry about all that some other time, release
those thoughts, and return your attention to the sensations inside your body.
6. Keep breathing. As you experience sexual pleasure, your muscles will contract, and
often people ﬁnd themselves holding their breath or breathing more shallowly. Periodically
check in with your breathing, relax your abdominal muscles, and allow yourself to breathe.
Don’t try to make anything happen, just allow yourself to notice what it feels like and let
your body do what it wants. If you feel worried that you’re losing control of your body, relax
into that fear, reassure yourself that you’re safe, know that you can stop anytime you
choose. And of course, if it gets to be too much, feel free to stop anytime you like. The
more you keep going, the more the pleasure and tension will spread through your body,
and it will cross some intense threshold, and explode . . . eventually.
If you’re learning to orgasm with a partner, do all of this alone for a week (or three), then do it
with a photo of your partner sitting beside you. Do that for a week (or three). Then do it with your
beloved partner on the phone or in the next room. Then with them in the room but far away, in
the dark, blindfolded, and facing the other way. Gradually increase their proximity and even the
light.

[PDF page 308]

Once you’re orgasming with your partner on the bed with you, begin showing what feels good
to you—you can even use some variation on the exercise described in the previous chapter, for
couples with desire diﬀerences. Move your partner’s hands on your body to show what you like.
And always, notice if you’re getting frustrated and remember that you are already at the goal
state: pleasure.

[PDF page 309]

appendix 2: extended orgasm
Extending and expanding your orgasms is a kind of meditation. If you’ve never meditated in
nonsexual ways, it might be easiest if you begin by practicing outside the context of sexuality.
Here’s how.
Begin with a simple breathing exercise like the one I describe in the spectatoring section.
Inhale through your nose for ﬁve seconds.
Then exhale through your mouth for ten seconds.
Do that eight times, for a total of two minutes.
As you breathe, your mind will wander to other things. That is normal and healthy! The point
is not to prevent your mind from wandering but to notice when that happens, let those thoughts
go for the moment, and gently return your attention to your breathing.
The breathing is good for you, but the noticing that your mind wandered and returning your
attention to your breath is the crucial skill.
Do this every day, and gradually you’ll notice yourself noticing what you’re paying attention to
all the time. Once that’s happening spontaneously, you’re ready to begin moving toward
extended orgasm.
When you’re ready, create a context where you have lots of time on your own (or with your
partner) without interruption or distraction. You’ll need an hour or two—and if you’re thinking, “I
don’t have an hour or two to have an orgasm,” that’s totally fair! Extended orgasm is the sex
equivalent of running a marathon. You can be as healthy as anyone needs to be and never run a
marathon. Just jog a few times a week, that’s great! But sometimes you have the opportunity to
set an ambitious goal and dedicate some time and attention to it. Whether it’s a marathon or
ecstasy, it’s always a choice you make, depending on what ﬁts your life.
So. Create a context. And begin with the breathing exercise for two minutes, practicing
returning your attention to your breath when it strays.
Then begin a little sensory exploration, paying attention to how your body feels, using all the
techniques in the therapeutic masturbation approach (appendix 1).
Imagine that arousal happens on a scale of 0–10, where 0 is no arousal and 10 is orgasm.
Start at 0 and allow your arousal to grow up to 5, which is deﬁnitely turned on, deﬁnitely
interested.
Then back down to 1. Allow the tension in your muscles to dissipate.
Go up to 6, and then back down to 2.

[PDF page 310]

Of course, as you go through this process, notice when your attention strays to outside
thoughts, let those thoughts go, and return your attention to the sensations of your body. And
don’t forget to breathe.
Up to 7, down to 3.
7 is pretty aroused. By the time you get to 7, your body may become reluctant to stop moving
toward orgasm. This is where the crucial skill of taking your foot oﬀ the accelerator without
putting it on the brake comes in. Just turn oﬀ the ons without turning on the oﬀs. Allow your
muscles to relax, allow the arousal to dissipate softly.
Up to 8, down to 4.
Up to 9, down to 5.
9 is a very, very high level of arousal, and your body is very much on the train at this point. It
wants to move forward to its destination. So it may be diﬃcult, on your ﬁrst attempts, to relax your
abdominal, thigh, and buttock muscles enough to ease your arousal down. When you do, you
may experience a kind of spreading warmth or tingling. Whereas fast orgasms are generally
focused right in the genitals, these slower orgasms spread out over your whole body. Let that
happen.
Still notice when your thoughts stray and return your attention to the sensations in your body.
Up to 9 1/2, down to 6.
9 1/2 is the bittersweet screaming edge of orgasm. At ﬁrst, it may be you ﬁnd it diﬃcult to take
pressure oﬀ the accelerator. Feel free not to the ﬁrst few times you try this—the worst that can
happen is you’ll have an orgasm!
But once you learn the knack, allow your arousal to reach 6, go back to 9 1/2, then down to 7.
You’ll need to make a deliberate eﬀort to ease tension away from your abdomen, buttocks,
and thigh muscles, because that tension can push you over the edge. As you relax, you’ll sense
the arousal spreading from your genitals, radiating into the rest of your body.
Back to 9 1/2, down to 8.
Back to 9 1/2, down to 9. By now, you’re constantly hovering around orgasm, holding yourself
at the peak sexual tension your body can contain. That’s extended orgasm. Congratulations!
With practice, you can stay there as long as you like, as long as your body can sustain, always
noticing what you’re paying attention to and gently nudging your attention toward your body
sensations. You’re a bit like a bathtub at this point, where the tension is trickling into you at
exactly the same rate that it’s going out. If it begins to trickle just a little bit more quickly than it’s
going out, you’ll cross the threshold and release. If it begins to drain just a bit more quickly than
it’s trickling in, you’ll drift away from the peak. There is no such thing as failure here, only
diﬀerent kinds of success, because it’s all intense pleasure.
This whole process might take forty-ﬁve minutes or an hour, and there will be Feelings, make
no mistake. And even if you don’t have an extended orgasm, you’ll still have loads of pleasure!

[PDF page 311]

The great thing about ecstatic pleasure is that it cannot coexist with shame, stress, fear,
anger, bitterness, rage, or exhaustion. Practicing ecstasy is practicing living outside all of those
things, learning how to release them. It’s as good for you as vegetables, jogging, sleep, and
breathing.

[PDF page 312]

about the author
JON CRISPIN
EMILY NAGOSKI is Director of Wellness Education and Lecturer at Smith
College, where she teaches Women’s Sexuality. She has a Ph.D. in
health behavior with a doctoral concentration in human sexuality from
Indiana University (IU), and a master’s degree (also from IU) in
counseling, with a clinical internship at the Kinsey Institute Sexual
Health Clinic. She also has a B.A. in psychology, with minors in
cognitive science and philosophy, from the University of Delaware.
While at IU, Emily worked as an educator and docent at the Kinsey
Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction. She also
taught graduate and undergraduate classes in human sexuality,
relationships and communication, stress management, and sex
education.
She is the author of three guides for Ian Kerner’s GoodInBed.com,
including Guide to Female Orgasms, and she writes the popular sex
blog TheDirtyNormal.com.
Emily lives in western Massachusetts with two dogs, two cats, and a
cartoonist.

[PDF page 313]

LEARN MORE AT WWW.THEDIRTYNORMAL.COM
@emilynagoski
MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT
SimonandSchuster.com
authors.simonandschuster.com/Dr-Emily-Nagoski

[PDF page 314]

We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster
eBook.
Join our mailing list and get updates on new releases, deals, bonus content and other
great books from Simon & Schuster.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
or visit us online to sign up at
eBookNews.SimonandSchuster.com

[PDF page 315]

references
Abler, Birgit, Henrik Walter, Susanne Erk, Hannes Kammerer, and Manfred Spitzer. “Prediction
Error as a Linear Function of Reward Probability Is Coded in Human Nucleus Accumbens.”
NeuroImage 31, no. 2 (2006): 790–95. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.01.001.
Acevedo, Bianca P., Arthur Aron, Helen E. Fisher, and Lucy L. Brown. “Neural Correlates of
Long-Term Intense Romantic Love.” Social Cognitive and Aﬀective Neuroscience, 2011.
doi:10.1093/scan/nsq092.
Alzate, H., B. Useche, and M. Villegas. “Heart Rate Change as Evidence for Vaginally Elicited
Orgasm and Orgasm Intensity.” Annals of Sex Research 2 (1989): 345–57.
Angier, Natalie. “Conversations/Ellen T. M. Laan; Science Is Finding Out What Women Really
Want.” New York Times, August 13, 1995.
www.nytimes.com/1995/08/13/weekinreview/conversations-ellen-tm-laan-science-is-ﬁnding-
out-what-women-really-want.html.
Ariely, Dan. Predictably Irrational: The Hidden Forces That Shape Our Decisions. Rev. ed. New
York: Harper, 2009.
Aristotle [pseud.]. The Complete Master-Piece of Aristotle the Famous Philosopher, Displaying
the Secrets of Nature in the Generation of Man, revised by Nicholas Culpepper. 1814.
https://archive.org/details/101206393.nim.nih.gov.
Armstrong, Elizabeth A., Paula England, and Alison C. K. Fogarty. “Accounting for Women’s
Orgasms and Sexual Enjoyment in College Hookups and Relationships.” American
Sociological Review 77, no. 3 (2012): 435–62. doi: 10.1177/0003122412445802.
Arnow, B. A., L. Millheiser, A. Garrett, M. Lake Polan, G. H. Glover, K. R. Hill, and A. Lightbody,
et al. “Women With Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder Compared to Normal Females: A
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study.” Neuroscience 158, no. 2 (2009): 484–502.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.09.044.
Aubrey, Allison. “Feeling a Little Blue May Mask Our Ability to Taste Fat.” National Public
Radio, June 6, 2013. www.npr.org/blogs/thesalt/2013/06/04/188706043/feeling-a-little-blue-
may-mask-our-ability-to-taste-fat?
ft=1&f=1007&utm_source=twitterfeed&utm_medium=twitter&utm_campaign=nprscience.
Bacon, Linda. “The HAES Manifesto.” From Health at Every Size: The Surprising Truth About
Your Weight. Dallas: BenBella Books, 2010.
lindabacon.org/HAESbook/pdf_ﬁles/HAES_Manifesto.pdf.

[PDF page 316]

Baer, Ruth A. “Construct Validity of the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire in Mediating and
Nonmediating Samples.” Assessment 15, no. 3 (2008): 329–42. doi:
10.1177/1073191107313003.
Baer, Ruth A., Gregory T. Smith, Jaclyn Hopkins, Jennifer Krietemeyer, and Leslie Toney.
“Using Self-Report Assessment Methods to Explore Facets of Mindfulness.” Assessment 13,
no. 1 (2006): 27–45. doi: 10.1177/1073191105283504.
Baliki, Marwan N., Paul Y. Geha, Howard L. Fields, and A. Vania Apkarian. “Predicting Value of
Pain and Analgesia: Nucleus Accumbens Response to Noxious Stimuli Changes in the
Presence of Chronic Pain.” Neuron 66, no. 1 (2010): 149–60. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2010.03.002.
Balzer, Alexandra M. “Eﬃcacy of Bibliotherapy as a Treatment for Low Sexual Desire in
Women.” PhD diss., University of Missouri–Columbia, 2012.
Bancroft, John, and Cynthia A. Graham. “The Varied Nature of Women’s Sexuality: Unresolved
Issues and a Theoretical Approach.” Hormones and Behavior 59, no. 5 (2011): 717–29.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.yhbeh.2011.01.005.
Bancroft, John, Jeni Loftus, and J. Scott Long. “Distress About Sex: A National Survey of
Women in Heterosexual Relationships.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 32, no. 3 (2003): 193–
208.
Basson, Rosemary. “Biopsychosocial Models of Women’s Sexual Response: Applications to
Management of ‘Desire Disorders.’ ” Sexual and Relationship Therapy 18, no. 1 (2003): 107–
15. doi: 10.1080/1468199031000061308.
———. “The Female Sexual Response: A Diﬀerent Model.” Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy
26, no. 1 (2000): 51–65.
———. “Hormones and Sexuality: Current Complexities and Future Directions.” Maturitas 57,
no. 1 (2007): 66–70. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2007.02.018.
BBC News. “Words Can Change What We Smell.” September 26, 2005.
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/4558075.stm.
Beach, Frank A. “Characteristics of Masculine ‘Sex Drive.’ ” Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation, vol. 4. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1956, 1–32.
Beck, J. Gayle, Alan W. Bozman, and Tina Qualtrough. “The Experience of Sexual Desire:
Psychological Correlates in a College Sample.” Journal of Sex Research 28, no. 3 (1991):
443–56.
Becker, Anne E. Body, Self, and Society: The View from Fiji. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1995.
Becker, Anne E., Rebecca A. Burwell, David B. Herzog, Paul Hamburg, and Stephen E. Gilman.
“Eating Behaviours and Attitudes Following Prolonged Exposure to Television Among Ethnic
Fijian Adolescent Girls.” British Journal of Psychology 180 (2002): 509–14. doi:
10.1192/bjp.180.6.509.

[PDF page 317]

Becker, Anne E., Jennifer J. Thomas, Asenaca Bainivualiku, Lauren Richards, Kesaia Navara,
Andrea L. Roberts, Stephen E. Gilman, and Ruth H. Striegel-Moore. “Validity and Reliability of
a Fijian Translation and Adaptation of the Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire.”
International Journal of Eating Disorders 43, no. 2 (2010): 171–78. doi: 10.1002/eat.20675.
Bergner, Daniel. What Do Women Want? Adventures in the Science of Female Desire. New
York: Harper, 2013.
———. “Women Who Want to Want.” New York Times, November 24, 2009.
www.nytimes.com/2009/11/29/magazine/29sex-t.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
Berridge, Kent. The Mechanisms of Self-Control: Lessons from Addiction. Video, The Science
Network, May 13, 2010. thesciencenetwork.org/search?program=The+Mechanisms+of+Self-
Control%3A+Lessons+from+Addiction.
Berridge, Kent, Richie Davidson, and Daniel Gilbert. The Neuroscience of Happiness. Video,
Aspen Ideas Festival, 2011. www.aspenideas.org/session/new-neuroscience-happiness.
Berridge, Kent C., and Morten L. Kringelbach. “Neuroscience of Aﬀect: Brain Mechanisms of
Pleasure and Displeasure.” Current Opinion in Neurobiology 23, no. 3 (2013): 294–303.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2013.01.017.
Berridge, Kent, and Piotr Winkielman. “What Is an Unconscious Emotion? (The Case for
Unconscious ‘Liking’).” Cognition & Emotion 17, no. 2 (2003): 181–211.
Besser, Avi, Gordon L. Flett, and Richard A. Davis. “Self-Criticism, Dependency, Silencing the
Self, and Loneliness: A Test of a Mediational Model.” Personality and Individual Diﬀerences
35, no. 8 (2003): 1735–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0191-8869(02)00403-8.
Bianchi-Demicheli, Francesco, and Stéphanie Ortigue. “Toward an Understanding of the
Cerebral Substrates of Woman’s Orgasm.” Neuropsychologia 45, no. 12 (2007): 2645–59.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.04.016.
Bifulco, A., P. M. Moran, C. Ball, and O. Bernazzani. “Adult Attachment Style. I: Its Relationship
to Clinical Depression.” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 37 (2002): 50–59.
Birnbaum, Gurit E., Harry T. Reis, Mario Mikulincer, Omri Gillath, and Ayala Orpaz. “When Sex
Is More Than Just Sex: Attachment Orientations, Sexual Experience, and Relationship
Quality.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 91, no. 5 (2006): 929–43. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.929.
Bitzer, Johannes, Annamaria Giraldi, and Jim Pfaus. “Sexual Desire and Hypoactive Sexual
Desire Disorder in Women. Introduction and Overview. Standard Operating Procedure (SOP
Part 1).” Journal of Sexual Medicine 10, no. 1 (2013): 36–49. 10.1111/j.1743-
6109.2012.02818.x.
Bloemers, Jos, Jeroen Gerritsen, Richard Bults, Hans Koppeschaar, Walter Everaerd, Berend
Olivier, and Adriaan Tuiten. “Induction of Sexual Arousal in Women Under Conditions of
Institutional and Ambulatory Laboratory Circumstances: A Comparative Study.” Journal of
Sexual Medicine 7, no. 3 (2010): 1160–76. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2009.01660.x.

[PDF page 318]

Bloemers, Jos, Kim van Rooij, Saskia Poels, Irwin Goldstein, Walter Everaerd, Hans
Koppeschaar, and Meredith Chivers, et al. “Toward Personalized Sexual Medicine (Part 1):
Integrating the ‘Dual Control Model’ into Diﬀerential Drug Treatments for Hypoactive Sexual
Desire Disorder and Female Sexual Arousal Disorder.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 10, no. 3
(2013): 791–809. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.02984.x.
Bohlen, Joseph G., James P. Held, Margaret Olwen Sanderson, and Andrew Ahlgren. “The
Female Orgasm: Pelvic Contraction.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 11, no. 5 (1982): 367–86.
Borg, Charmaine, and Peter J. de Jong. “Feelings of Disgust and Disgust-Induced Avoidance
Weaken Following Induced Sexual Arousal in Women.” PLoS ONE, 2012. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0044111.
Borg, Charmaine, Peter J. de Jong, and Willibrord Weijmar Schultz. “Vaginismus and
Dyspareunia: Relationship with General and Sex-Related Moral Standards.” Journal of
Sexual Medicine 8, no. 1 (2011): 223–31. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2010.02080.x.
Both, Stephanie, Walter Everaerd, and Ellen Laan. “Modulation of Spinal Reﬂexes by Aversive
and Sexually Appetitive Stimuli.” Psychophysiology 40, no. 2 (2003): 174–83. doi:
10.1111/1469-8986.00019.
Bradford, Andrea, and Cindy Meston. “Correlates of Placebo Response in the Treatment of
Sexual Dysfunction in Women: A Preliminary Report.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 4, no. 5
(2007): 1345–51. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2007.00578.x.
———. “The Impact of Anxiety on Sexual Arousal in Women.” Behaviour Research and
Therapy 44, no. 8 (2006): 1067–77. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2005.08.006.
Britton, Lauren E., Denise M. Martz, Doris G. Bazzini, Lisa A. Curtin, and Anni LeaShomb. “Fat
Talk and Self-Presentation of Body Image: Is There a Social Norm for Women to Self-
Degrade?” Body Image 3, no. 3 (2006): 247–54.
Brotto, Lori A., A. John Petkau, Fernand Labrie, and Rosemary Basson. “Predictors of Sexual
Desire Disorders in Women.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 8 (2011): 742–53. doi:
10.1111/j.1743-6109.2010.02146.x.
Buck, Ross. “Prime Theory: An Integrated View of Motivation and Emotion.” Psychological
Review 92, no. 3 (1985): 389–413.
Cain, Virginia S., Catherine B. Johannes, Nancy E. Avis, Beth Mohr, Miriam Schocken, Joan
Skurnick, and Marcia Ory. “Sexual Functioning and Practices in a Multi-Ethnic Study of
Midlife Women: Baseline Results from Swan.” Journal of Sex Research 40, no. 3 (2003):
266–76.
Canner, Liz. Orgasm, Inc. DVD. New York: First Run Features, 2009.
Cantazaro, Amy, and Meifen Wei. “Adult Attachment, Dependence, Self-Criticism, and
Depressive Symptoms: A Test of a Mediational Model.” Journal of Personality 78, no. 4
(2010): 1135–62. wei.public.iastate.edu/manuscript/attachment dependence self-
criticism.pdf.

[PDF page 319]

Carpenter, Deanna L., Cynthia Graham, Erick Janssen, Harrie Vorst, and Jelte Wicherts. “The
Dual Control Model: Gender, Sexual Problems, and Prevalence of Sexual Excitation and
Inhibition Proﬁles.” www.slideserve.com/phoebe/the-dual-control-model-gender-sexual-
problems-and-prevalence-of-sexual-excitation-and-inhibition-proﬁles.
Carpenter, Deanna, Erick Janssen, Cynthia Graham, Harrie Vorst, and Jelte Wicherts.
“Women’s Scores on the Sexual Inhibition/Sexual Excitation Scales (SIS/SES): Gender
Similarities and Diﬀerences.” Journal of Sex Research 45, no. 1 (2008): 36–48. doi:
10.1080/00224490701808076.
Carvalheira, Ana A., Lori A. Brotto, and Isabel Leal. “Women’s Motivations for Sex: Exploring the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fourth Edition, Text Revision Criteria for Hypoactive Sexual
Desire and Female Sexual Arousal Disorders.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 7, no. 4 (2010):
1454–63. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2009.01693.x.
Carvalheira, Ana, and Isabel Leal. “Masturbation Among Women: Associated Factors and
Sexual Response in a Portuguese Community Sample.” Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy 39,
no. 4 (2013): 347–67. doi: 10.1080/0092623X.2011.628440.
Carver, Charles S. “Pleasure as a Sign You Can Attend to Something Else: Placing Positive
Feelings Within a General Model of Aﬀect.” Cognition & Emotion 17, no. 2 (2003): 241–61.
Carver, Charles S., and Michael F. Scheier. “Cybernetic Control Processes and the Self-
Regulation of Behavior.” In The Oxford Handbook of Human Motivation, edited by Richard M.
Ryan, 28–42. New York: Oxford University Press, 2012.
–——. “Self-Regulation of Action and Aﬀect.” In Handbook of Self-Regulation: Research,
Theory, and Applications, 2nd ed., edited by Kathleen D. Vohs and Roy F. Baumeister, 3–21.
New York: Guilford Press, 2013.
Childress, Anna Rose, et al. “Prelude to Passion: Limbic Activation by ‘Unseen’ Drug and Sexual
Cues.” PLoS ONE 1 (2008). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001506.
Colson, M.-H. “Female Orgasm: Myths, Facts, and Controversies.” Sexologies 19, no. 1 (2010):
8–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sexol.2009.11.004.
Cooper, Lynne M., Mark Pioli, Ash Levitt, Amelia E. Talley, Lada Micheas, and Nancy L. Collins.
“Attachment Styles, Sex Motives, and Sexual Behavior: Evidence for Gender-Speciﬁc
Expressions of Attachment Dynamics.” In Dynamics of Romantic Love: Attachment,
Caregiving, and Sex, edited by Mario Mikulincer and Gail S. Goodman, 243–74. New York:
Guilford Press, 2006.
David, Daryn H., and Karlen Lyons-Ruth. “Diﬀerential Attachment Responses of Male and
Female Infants to Frightening Maternal Behavior: Tend or Befriend Versus Fight or Flight?”
Infant Mental Health Journal 26, no. 1 (2005): 1–18. doi: 10.1002/imhj.20033.
Davila, Joanne, Dorli Burge, and Constance Hammen. “Why Does Attachment Style Change?”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73, no. 4 (1997): 826–38. 10.1037/0022-
3514.73.4.826.

[PDF page 320]

Davis, Clive M., Joani Blank, Hung-Yu Lin, and Consuelo Bonillas. “Characteristics of Vibrator
Use among Women.” Journal of Sex Research 33, no. 4 (1996): 313–20.
Dawood, Khytam, Katherine M. Kirk, J. Michael Bailey, Paul W. Andrews, and Nicholas G.
Martin. “Genetic and Environmental Inﬂuences on the Frequency of Orgasm in Women.” Twin
Research and Human Genetics 8, no. 1 (2012): 27–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1375/twin.8.1.27.
Dawson, Samantha J., and Meredith L. Chivers. “Gender Diﬀerences and Similarities in Sexual
Desire.” Current Sexual Health Reports (2014): 1–9.
de Jong, Peter J., Mark van Overveld, and Charmaine Borg. “Giving in to Arousal or Staying
Stuck in Disgust? Disgust-Based Mechanisms in Sex and Sexual Dysfunction.” Journal of
Sex Research 50, no. 3 (2013). doi: 10.1080/00224499.2012.746280.
de Jong, Peter J., Mark van Overveld, Willibrord Weijmar Schultz, Madelon L. Peters, and
Femke M. Buwalda. “Disgust and Contamination Sensitivity in Vaginismus and Dyspareunia.”
Archives of Sexual Behavior 38, no. 2 (2009): 244–52.
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17909958.
Dewitte, Marieke. “Diﬀerent Perspectives on the Sex-Attachment Link: Towards an Emotion-
Motivational Account.” Journal of Sex Research 49, no. 2–3 (2012): 105–24.
Diamond, Lisa M. Sexual Fluidity: Understanding Women’s Love and Desire. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2008.
Dickerson, S. S., and M. E. Kemeny. “Acute Stressors and Cortisol Response: A Theoretical
Integration and Synthesis of Laboratory Research.” Psychological Bulletin 130, no. 3 (2004):
335–91.
Dreger, Alice Domurat. “Why ‘Disorders of Sex Development’? (On Language and Life).”
November 17, 2007. http://alicedreger.com/dsd.html.
Drysdale, Kirsten, Ali Russell, and Andrew Glover. “Labiaplasty: Hungry Beast.” ABC TV
Australia, 2010. http://vimeo.com/10883108.
Duﬀey, Eliza Bisbee. The Relations of the Sexes. 1876. New York: Arno Press, 1974.
Dunn, Kate M., Lynn F. Cherkas, and Tim D. Spector. “Genetic Inﬂuences on Variation in
Female Orgasmic Function: A Twin Study.” Biology Letters 1, no. 3 (2005): 260–63. doi:
10.1098/rsbl.2005.0308.
Eichelberger, Erika. “Todd Akin Not Sorry for His Insane Rape Comments.” Mother Jones, July
10, 2014, accessed July 27, 2014, http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2014/07/todd-akin-
book-legitimate-rape.
Ekman, Paul. Emotions Revealed: Recognizing Faces and Feelings to Improve Communication
and Emotional Life. 2nd ed. New York: Henry Holt, 2007.
Ellin, Abby. “More Women Look Over the Counter for a Libido Fix.” New York Times, July 2,
2012. www.nytimes.com/2012/07/03/health/more-women-seek-over-the-counter-sexual-
remedies.html.
Erekson, Elisabeth A., Deanna K. Martin, Kejia Zhu, Maria M. Ciarleglio, Divya A. Patel, Marsha
K. Guess, and Elena S. Ratner. “Sexual Function in Older Women After Oophorectomy.”

[PDF page 321]

Obstetrics and Gynecology 120, no. 4 (2012): 833–42. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0b013e31826afd1.
Feeney, Judith A., and Patricia Noller. “Attachment Style as a Predictor of Adult Romantic
Relationships.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 58, no. 2 (1990): 281–91. doi:
0022-3514/90/SO0.75.
Feeney, Nolan. “Living Myths About Virginity.” Atlantic, February 7, 2014.
www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2014/02/living-myths-about-virginity/283628.
Flaten, Magne Arve, Terje Simonsen, and Harald Olsen. “Drug-Related Information Generates
Placebo and Nocebo Responses That Modify the Drug Response.” Psychosomatic Medicine
61, no. 2 (1999): 250–55. www.psychosomaticmedicine.org/content/61/2/250.full.
Foster, William Trufant. The Social Emergency: Studies in Sex Hygiene and Morals. Boston:
Houghton Miﬄin, 1914.
Fraley, R. Chris, Neils G. Waller, and Kelly A. Brennan. “An Item-Response Theory Analysis of
Self-Report Measures of Adult Attachment.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
78, no. 2 (2000): 350–65. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.78.2.350.
Frühauf, Sarah, Heike Gerger, Hannah Maren Schmidt, Thomas Munder, and Jürgen Barth.
“Eﬃcacy of Psychological Interventions for Sexual Dysfunction: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 42, no. 6 (2013): 915–33.
Fulu, Emma, Xian Warner, Stephanie Miedema, Rachel Jewkes, Tim Roselli, and James Lang.
Why Do Some Men Use Violence Against Women and How Can We Prevent It? Quantitative
Findings from the United Nations Multi-Country Study on Men and Violence in Asia and the
Paciﬁc. Bangkok: UNDP, UNFPA, UN Women and UNV, 2013.
Gaﬀney, D. “Established and Emerging PTSD Treatments.” Mental Health Clinician 2, no. 7
(2013): 35.
Gans, Margery. “What’s It All About? Attending to the Meaning of Eating Disorders.” Paper
presented at the Collaborative Ways to Address Disordered Eating on Campus: It Takes a
Village conference. Cambridge, MA, April 17–18, 2009.
Garde, K., and I. Lunde. “Female Sexual Behavior: A Study in a Random Sample of 40-Year-
Old Women.” Maturitas 2 (1980): 240–55.
Georgiadis, J. R., Rudie Kortekaas, M. L. Kringelbach, and K. C. Berridge. “The Sweetest
Taboo: Functional Neurobiology of Human Sexuality in Relation to Pleasure.” In Pleasures of
the Brain, edited by Morten L. Kringelbach and Kent. C. Berridge, 178–201. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2010.
Germer, Christopher K. The Mindful Path to Self-Compassion: Freeing Yourself from
Destructive Thoughts and Emotions. New York: Guilford Press, 2009.
Glass, Ira, and Deborah Blum. “317: Unconditional Love Transcript.” This American Life,
Chicago Public Media. September 15, 2006. www.thisamericanlife.org/radio-
archives/episode/317/transcript.
Glickman, Charlie, and Aislinn Emirzian. The Ultimate Guide to Prostate Pleasure: Erotic
Exploration for Men and Their Partners. Berkeley: Cleis Press, 2013.

[PDF page 322]

Goldacre, Ben. “Ben Goldacre at Nerdstock.” YouTube video, 2009. www.youtube.com/watch?
v=O1Q3jZw4FGs.
Goldstein, Andrew, Caroline F. Pukall, and Irwin Goldstein. When Sex Hurts: A Woman’s Guide
to Banishing Sexual Pain. Boston: Da Capo Press, 2011.
Gollwitzer, Peter M., and Gabriele Oettingen. “Implementation Intentions.” New York University.
www.psych.nyu.edu/gollwitzer/Implementation%20Intentions.pdf.
Gottman, John M. The Science of Trust: Emotional Attunement for Couples. New York: W. W.
Norton, 2011.
Gottman, John, and Joan DeClaire. The Heart of Parenting: Raising an Emotionally Intelligent
Child. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997.
Gottman, John, and Nan Silver. What Makes Love Last? How to Build Trust and Avoid
Betrayal. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2013.
Graham, Cynthia A. “The DSM Diagnostic Criteria for Female Orgasmic Disorder.” Archives of
Sexual Behavior 39 (2010): 256–70. doi: 10.1007/s10508-009-9542-2.
Graham, Cynthia A., Stephanie A. Sanders, and Robin R. Milhausen. “The Sexual
Excitation/Sexual Inhibition Inventory for Women: Psychometric Properties.” Archives of
Sexual Behavior 35, no. 4 (2006): 397–409.
Graham, Cynthia A., Stephanie A. Sanders, Robin R. Milhausen, and Kimberly R. McBride.
“Turning On and Turning Oﬀ: A Focus Group Study of the Factors That Aﬀect Women’s
Sexual Arousal.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 33, no. 6 (2004): 527–38.
Greenwald, Mark K., Edwin W. Cook, and Peter J. Lang. “Aﬀective Judgment and
Psychophysiological Response: Dimensional Covariation in the Evaluation of Pictoral Stimuli.”
Journal of Psychophysiology 3 (1989): 51–64.
Gruen, Rand J., Raul Silva, Joshua Ehrlich, Jack W. Schweitzer, and Arnold J. Friedhoﬀ.
“Vulnerability to Stress: Self-Criticism and Stress-Induced Changes in Biochemistry.” Journal
of Personality 65, no. 1 (1997): 33–47. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1997.tb00528.x.
Hall, Kathryn S., Yitzchak Binik, and Enrico Di Tomasso. “Concordance Between Physiological
and Subjective Measures of Sexual Arousal.” Behaviour Research and Therapy 23, no. 3
(1985): 297–303.
Hamilton, Lisa Dawn, and Cindy M. Meston. “Chronic Stress and Sexual Function in Women.”
Journal of Sexual Medicine 10, no. 10 (2013): 2443–54.
Hawkins, Nicole, P. Scott Richards, H. Mac Granley, and David M. Stein. “The Impact of
Exposure to the Thin-Ideal Media Image on Women.” Eating Disorders: The Journal of
Treatment and Prevention 12, no. 1 (2004). doi: 10.1080/10640260490267751.
Hayes, Richard D., Lorraine Dennerstein, Catherine M. Bennet, and Christopher K. Fairley.
“What Is the ‘True’ Prevalence of Female Sexual Dysfunctions and Does the Way We Assess
These Conditions Have an Impact?” Journal of Sexual Medicine 5, no. 4 (2008): 777–87.
Hayes, Sharon, and Stacey Tantleﬀ-Dunn. “Am I Too Fat to Be a Princess? Examining the
Eﬀects of Popular Children’s Media on Young Girls’ Body Image.” British Journal of

[PDF page 323]

Developmental Psychology 28, no. 2 (2010): 413–26. doi: 10.1348/026151009X424240.
Hegazy, A. A., and M. O. Al-Rukban. “Hymen: Facts and Conceptions.” The Health 3, no. 4
(2012): 109–15.
Heiman, Julia R. “Psychologic Treatments for Female Sexual Dysfunction: Are They Eﬀective
and Do We need Them?” Archives of Sexual Behavior 31, no. 5 (2002): 445–50.
Heiman, Julia R., and Donald Pfaﬀ. “Sexual Arousal and Related Concepts: An Introduction.”
Hormones and Behavior 59, no. 5 (2011): 613–15.
Hendrickx, Lies, Luk Gijs, and Paul Enzlin. “Prevalence Rates of Sexual Diﬃculties and
Associated Distress in Heterosexual Men and Women: Results from an Internet Survey in
Flanders.” Journal of Sex Research 51, no. 1 (2014): 1–12. doi:
10.1080/00224499.2013.819065.
Henson, Donald E., H. B. Rubin, and Claudia Henson. “Analysis of the Consistency of Objective
Measures of Sexual Arousal in Women.” Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 12, no. 4
(1979): 701–11.
Herbenick, Debby, and J. Dennis Fortenberry. “Exercise-Induced Orgasm and Pleasure Among
Women.” Sexual and Relationship Therapy 26, no. 4 (2011): 373–88. doi:
10.1080/14681994.2011.647902.
Herbenick, Debra, Michael Reece, Stephanie Sanders, Brian Dodge, Annahita Ghassemi, and
J. Dennis Fortenberry. “Prevalence and Characteristics of Vibrator Use by Women in the
United States: Results from a Nationally Representative Study.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 6
(2009): 1857–66.
www.iu.edu/~kinsey/publications/PDF/Herbenick%20et%20al%20JSM%202009%20Women
’s%20Vibe%20Final%20in%20Print.pdf.
Hess, Amanda. “Women Want Sex, but Men Don’t Want Them to Know It.” Slate, June 4, 2013.
www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2013/06/what_do_women_want_sex_according_to
_daniel_bergner_s_new_book_on_female.html.
Hitchens, Christopher. Hitch-22: A Memoir. New York: Grand Central Publishing, 2010.
Hite, Shere. The Hite Report: A Nationwide Study of Female Sexuality. New York: Macmillan,
1976.
Hoge, Elizabeth A., Britta K. Holzel, Luana Marques, Christina A. Metcalf, Narayan Brach, Sara
W. Lazar, and Naomi M. Simon. “Mindfulness and Self-Compassion in Generalized Anxiety
Disorder: Examining Predictors of Disability.” Evidence-Based Complementary and
Alternative Medicine (2013). http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/576258.
Hollenstein, Tom, and Dianna Lanteigne. “Models and Methods of Emotional Concordance.”
Biological Psychology 98 (2014): 1–5. doi: 10.1016/biopsycho.2013.12.012.
Jacobs, Nele, Soﬁe Van Gestel, Catherine Derom, Evert Thiery, Philip Vernon, Robert Derom,
and Robert Vlietinck. “Heritability Estimates of Intelligence in Twins: Eﬀect of Chorion Type.”
Behavior Genetics 31, no. 2 (2001): 209–17.
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1010257512183.

[PDF page 324]

James, E. L. Fifty Shades of Grey. New York: Vintage Books, 2012.
Janssen, Erick, and John Bancroft. “The Dual Control Model: The Role of Sexual Inhibition and
Excitation in Sexual Arousal and Behavior.” In The Psychophysiology of Sex, edited by Erick
Janssen, 197. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2007.
Janssen, Erick, Kathryn R. Macapagal, and Brian Mustanski. “Individual Diﬀerences in the
Eﬀects of Mood on Sexuality: The Revised Mood and Sexuality Questionnaire (MSQ-R).”
Journal of Sex Research 50, no. 7 (2013): 676–87.
Johnson, Sue. Hold Me Tight: Seven Conversations for a Lifetime of Love. New York: Little,
Brown, 2008.
———. Love Sense: The Revolutionary New Science of Romantic Relationships. New York:
Little, Brown, 2013.
Jozkowski, Kristen N., Debby Herbenick, Vanessa Schick, Michael Reece, Stephanie A.
Sanders, and J. Dennis Fortenberry. “Women’s Perceptions About Lubricant Use and Vaginal
Wetness During Sexual Activities.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 10, no. 2 (2013): 484–92. doi:
10.1111/jsm.12022.
Kaplan, Helen Singer. Sexual Desire Disorders: Dysfunctional Regulation of Sexual Motivation.
New York: Routledge, 1995.
Kingsberg, Sheryl A., Natalia Tkachenko, Johna Lucas, Amy Burbrink, Wayne Kreppner, and
Jodi B. Dickstein. “Characterization of Orgasmic Diﬃculties by Women: Focus Group
Evaluation.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 10, no. 9 (2013): 2242–50. doi: 10.1111/jsm.12224.
Kinsale, Laura. Flowers from the Storm. New York: Harper, 1992.
Kinsey, Alfred Charles, Wardell Baxter Pomeroy, and Clyde E. Martin. Sexual Behavior in the
Human Male. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1948.
Kinsey, Alfred C., Wardell B. Pomeroy, Clyde E. Martin, and Paul H. Gebhard. Sexual Behavior
in the Human Female. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1953.
Koehler, Sezin. “From the Mouths of Rapists: The Lyrics of Robin Thicke’s Blurred Lines.” The
Society Pages, September 17, 2013. http://thesocietypages.org/socimages/2013/09/17/from-
the-mouths-of-rapists-the-lyrics-of-robin-thickes-blurred-lines-and-real-life-rape/.
Komisaruk, Barry R., Beverly Whipple, Audrita Crawford, Sherry Grimes, Wen-Ching Liu,
Andrew Kalnin, and Kristine Mosier. “Brain Activation During Vaginocervical Self-Stimulation
and Orgasm in Women with Complete Spinal Cord Injury: fMRI Evidence of Mediation by the
Vagus Nerves.” Brain Research 1024 (2004): 77–88.
Komisaruk, Barry R., Nan Wise, Eleni Frangos, Wen-Ching Liu, Kachina Allen, and Stuart
Brody. “Women’s Clitoris, Vagina, and Cervix Mapped on the Sensory Cortex: fMRI
Evidence.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 8, no. 10 (2011): 2822–30. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-
6109.2011.02388.x.
Koos Slob, A., Cindy M. Bax, Wim C. J. Hop, David L. Rowland, and Jacob J. van der Werﬀ ten
Bosch. “Sexual Arousability and the Menstrual Cycle.” Psychoneuroendocrinology 21, no. 6
(1996): 545–58.

[PDF page 325]

Kring, Ann M., and Albert H. Gordon. “Sex Diﬀerences in Emotion: Expression, Experience, and
Physiology.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74, no. 3 (1998): 686–703.
Kylstra, Carolyn. “10 Lessons About the Female Orgasm.” Men’s Health, August 20, 2010.
http://blogs.menshealth.com/girl-next-door/10-lessons-about-the-female-orgasm/2010/08/20/.
Laan, Ellen, and Stephanie Both. “What Makes Women Experience Desire?” Feminism &
Psychology 18, no. 4 (2008): 505–14.
Laan, Ellen, Walter Everaerd, and Andrea Evers. “Assessment of Female Sexual Arousal:
Response Speciﬁcity and Construct Validity.” Psychophysiology 32, no. 5 (1995): 476–85.
La Guardia, Jennifer G., Richard M. Ryan, Charles E. Couchman, and Edward L. Deci. “Within-
Person Variation in Security of Attachment: A Self-Determination Theory Perspective on
Attachment, Need Fulﬁllment, and Well-Being.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
79, no. 3 (2000): 367–84.
www.selfdeterminationtheory.org/SDT/documents/2000_LaGuardiaRyanCouchDeci.pdf.
Lankveld, Jacques van. “Self-help Therapies for Sexual Dysfunction.” Journal of Sex Research
46, no. 2–3 (2009): 143–55.
Laumann, E. O., A. Nicolosi, D. B. Glasser, A. Paik, C. Gingell, E. Moreira, and T. Wang.
“Sexual Problems Among Women and Men Aged 40–80 y: Prevalence and Correlates
Identiﬁed in the Global Study of Sexual Attitudes and Behaviors.” International Journal of
Impotence Research 17 (2005): 39–57. doi:10.1038/sj.ijir.3901250.
Levin, Roy J. “The Human Female Orgasm: A Critical Evaluation of Its Proposed Reproductive
Functions.” Sexual and Relationship Therapy 26, no. 4 (2011): 301–14. doi:
10.1080/14681994.2011.649692.
Levin, Roy J., and Willy van Berlo. “Sexual Arousal and Orgasm in Subjects Who Experience
Forced or Non-Consensual Sexual Stimulation—A Review.” Journal of Clinical Forensic
Medicine 11, no. 2 (2004): 82–88. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcfm.2003.10.008.
Levin, Roy J., and Gorm Wagner. “Orgasm in Women in the Laboratory—Quantitative Studies
on Duration, Intensity, Latency, and Vaginal Blood Flow.” Archives of Sexual Behavior 14, no.
5 (1985): 439–49.
Levine, Peter. In an Unspoken Voice: How the Body Releases Trauma and Restores
Goodness. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2010.
———. Waking the Tiger: Healing Trauma. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 1997.
Lewandowski, G. W. Jr., and A. P. Aron. “Distinguishing Arousal from Novelty and Challenge in
Initial Romantic Attraction Between Strangers.” Social Behavior and Personality 32, no. 4
(2004): 361–72.
Lisak, David, and Paul M. Miller. “Repeat Rape and Multiple Oﬀending Among Undetected
Rapists.” Violence and Victims 17, no. 1 (2002).
Lloyd, Elisabeth A. The Case of the Female Orgasm: Bias in the Science of Evolution.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005.

[PDF page 326]

Longe, Olivia, Frances A. Maratos, Paul Gilbert, Gaynor Evans, Faye Volker, Helen Rockliﬀ, and
Gina Rippon. “Having a Word with Yourself: Neural Correlates of Self-Criticism and Self-
Reassurance.” NeuroImage 49, no. 2 (2010): 1849–56. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.09.019.
LoPiccolo, Joseph, and Leslie LoPiccolo, eds. Handbook of Sex Therapy. New York: Plenum,
1978.
Lykins, Amy D., Erick Janssen, and Cynthia A. Graham. “The Relationship Between Negative
Mood and Sexuality in Heterosexual College Women and Men.” Journal of Sex Research 43,
no. 2 (2006): 136–43.
MacPhee, David C., Susan M. Johnson, and Monika M. C. van Der Veer. “Low Sexual Desire in
Women: The Eﬀects of Marital Therapy.” Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy 21, no. 3 (1995):
159–82.
Magnanti, Brooke. The Sex Myth: Why Everything We’re Told Is Wrong. London: Weidenfeld &
Nicolson, 2012.
Mah, Kenneth, and Yitzchak M. Binik. “The Nature of Human Orgasm: A Critical Review of
Major Trends.” Clinical Psychology Review 21, no. 6 (2001): 823–56.
Marcus, Bat Sheva. “Changes in a Woman’s Sexual Experience and Expectations Following the
Introduction of Electric Vibrator Assistance.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 8, no. 12 (2011):
3398–3406. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2010.02132.x.
Masters, William H., and Virginia E. Johnson. Human Sexual Response. Boston: Little, Brown,
1966.
Matejka, Moritz, Philipp Kazzer, Maria Seehausen, Malek Bajbouj, Gisela Klann-Delius,
Winfried Menninghaus, Arthur M. Jacobs, Hauke R. Heekeren, and Kristin Prehn. “Talking
About Emotion: Prosody and Skin Conductance Indicate Emotion Regulation.” Frontiers in
Psychology 4 (2013). doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00260.
McCall, Katie, and Cindy Meston. “Cues Resulting in Desire for Sexual Activity in Women.”
Journal of Sexual Medicine 3 (2006): 838–52. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2006.00301.x.
———. “Diﬀerences Between Pre- and Postmenopausal Women in Cues for Sexual Desire.”
Journal of Sexual Medicine 4 (2007): 364–71. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2006.00421.x.
McCarthy, Barry, and Lana M. Wald. “Mindfulness and Good Enough Sex.” Sexual and
Relationship Therapy 28, no. 1 (2013): 39–47. doi: 10.1080/14681994.2013.770829.
McDowell, Margaret A., Cheryl D. Fryar, Cynthia L. Ogden, and Katherine M. Flegal.
“Anthropometric Reference Data for Children and Adults: United States, 2003–2006.”
National Health Statistics Report no. 10 (October 2008).
Meizner, I. “Sonographic Observation of In Utero Fetal ‘Masturbation.’ ” Journal of Ultrasound
Medicine 6, no. 2 (1987): 111.
Mesquita, Batja. “Emoting: A Contextualized Process.” In The Mind in Context, edited by Batja
Mesquita, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and Eliot R. Smith, 83–104. New York: Guilford Press, 2010.

[PDF page 327]

Meston, Cindy M., Elaine M. Hull, Roy J. Levin, Marcia L. Sipski, and Julia R. Heiman.
“Women’s Orgasm.”
kinseyinstitute.org/publications/PDF/womens%20orgasm%20annual%20review.pdf.
Metz, Michael E., and Barry W. McCarthy. “The ‘Good-Enough Sex’ Model for Couple Sexual
Satisfaction.” Sexual and Relationship Therapy 22, no. 3 (2007): 351–62. doi:
10.1080/14681990601013492.
Michael, Robert T., John H. Gagnon, Edward O. Laumann, and Gina Kolata. Sex in America: A
Deﬁnitive Survey. Boston: Little, Brown, 1994.
Milhausen, Robin R., Cynthia A. Graham, Stephanie A. Sanders, William L. Yarber, and Scott B.
Maitland. “Validation of the Sexual Excitation/Sexual Inhibition Inventory for Women and Men.”
Archives of Sexual Behavior 39, no. 5 (2010): 1091–1104.
Mitchell, John Cameron, and Stephen Trask. “The Origin of Love” from Hedwig and the Angry
Inch: Original Cast Recording. Atlantic Compact Disc 13766. 1999.
Mize, Sara J. S., and Alex Iantaﬃ. “The Place of Mindfulness in a Sensorimotor Psychotherapy
Intervention to Improve Women’s Sexual Health.” Sexual and Relationship Therapy 28, no. 1
(2013): 63–76. doi: 10.1080/14681994.2013.770144.
Moore, Lori. “Rep. Todd Akin: The Statement and the Reaction.” New York Times, August 20,
2012. www.nytimes.com/2012/08/21/us/politics/rep-todd-akin-legitimate-rape-statement-and-
reaction.html?_r=0.
Moran, C., and C. Lee. “What’s Normal? Inﬂuencing Women’s Perceptions of Normal Genitalia:
An Experiment Involving Exposure to Modiﬁed and Nonmodiﬁed Images.” BJOG: An
International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology (2013). doi: 10.1111/1471-0528.12578.
Morin, Jack. The Erotic Mind: Unlocking the Inner Sources of Passion and Fulﬁllment. New
York: Harper, 1995.
Morokoﬀ, Patricia J., and Julia R. Heiman. “Eﬀects of Erotic Stimuli on Sexually Functional and
Dysfunctional Women: Multiple Measures Before and After Sex Therapy.” Behaviour
Research and Therapy 18, no. 2 (1980): 127–37.
Nagoski, Emily, Erick Janssen, David Lohrmann, and Eric Nichols. “Risk, Individual Diﬀerences,
and Environment: An Agent-Based Modeling Approach to Sexual Risk-Taking.” Archives of
Sexual Behavior 41, no. 4 (2012): 849–60.
Nakamura, J., and M. Csikszentmihalyi. “Flow Theory and Research.” In The Handbook of
Positive Psychology, edited by C. R. Snyder and S. J. Lopez, 195–206. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2009.
Neﬀ, Kristin D. “Self-Compassion, Self-Esteem, and Well-Being.” Social and Personality
Psychology Compass 1 (2011): 1–12. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9004.2010.00330.x.
Ogden, Pat, Kekuni Minton, and Clare Pain. Trauma and the Body: A Sensorimotor Approach
to Psychotherapy. New York: W. W. Norton, 2006.
Organisation Intersex International Australia. “Public Statement by the Third International
Intersex Forum.” http://oii.org.au/24241/public-statement-by-the-third-international-intersex-

[PDF page 328]

forum/.
Panksepp, Jaak. “What Is an Emotional Feeling? Lessons about Aﬀective Origins from Cross-
Species Neuroscience.” Motivation and Emotion 36, no. 1 (2012): 4–15.
Panksepp, Jaak, and Lucy Bevin. The Archaeology of Mind: Neuroevolutionary Origins of
Human Emotions. New York: W. W. Norton, 2012.
Pazmany, Els, Sophie Bergeron, Lukas Van Oudenhove, Johan Verhaeghe, and Paul Enzlin.
“Body Image and Genital Self-Image in Pre-Menopausal Women with Dyspareunia.” Archives
of Sexual Behavior 42, no. 6 (2013): 999–1010. doi: 10.1007/s10508-013-0102-4.
Perel, Esther. Mating in Captivity: Unlocking Erotic Intelligence. New York: Harper, 2006.
———. “The Secret to Desire in a Long-Term Relationship.” TED video, February 2013.
www.ted.com/talks/esther_perel_the_secret_to_desire_in_a_long_term_relationship.
Peterson, Zoe D., Erick Janssen, and Ellen Laan. “Women’s Sexual Responses to Heterosexual
and Lesbian Erotica: The Role of Stimulus Intensity, Aﬀective Reaction, and Sexual History.”
Archives of Sexual Behavior 39 (2010): 880–97. doi: 10.1007/s10508-009-9546-y.
Pfaus, James G. “Neurobiology of Sexual Behavior.” Current Opinion in Neurobiology 9 (1999):
751–58.
http://66.199.228.237/boundary/addiction/boundary/neuralbiology_of_sexual_behavior.pdf.
Pfaus, James G., Tod E. Kippin, and Genaro Coria-Avila. “What Can Animal Models Tell Us
About Human Sexual Response?” Annual Review of Sex Research 14 (2003): 1–63.
Pfaus, James G., and Mark F. Wilkins. “A Novel Environment Disrupts Dopulation in Sexually
Naive but Not Experienced Male Rats: Reversal with Naloxone.” Physiology & Behavior 57,
no. 6 (1995): 1045–49.
Poels, Saskia, Jos Bloemers, Kim van Rooij, Irwin Goldstein, Jeroen Gerritsen, Diana van Ham,
and Frederiek van Mameren, et al. “Toward Personalized Sexual Medicine (Part 2):
Testosterone Combined with a PDE5 Inhibitor Increases Sexual Satisfaction in Women With
HSDD and FSAD, and a Low Sensitive System for Sexual Cues.” Journal of Sexual Medicine
10, no. 3 (2013): 810–23. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.02983.x.
Porges, Stephen. The Polyvagal Theory: Neurophysiological Foundations of Emotions,
Attachment, Communication, and Self-Regulation. New York: W. W. Norton, 2011.
———. “Reciprocal Inﬂuences Between Body and Brain in the Perception and Expression of
Aﬀect.” In The Healing Power of Emotion, edited by Diana Fosha, Daniel J. Siegel, and
Marion Solomon, 27–54. New York: W. W. Norton, 2009.
Powers, Theodore A., David C. Zuroﬀ, and Raluca A. Topciu. “Covert and Overt Expressions of
Self-Criticism and Perfectionism and Their Relation to Depression.” European Journal of
Personality 18, no. 1 (2004): 61–72. doi: 10.1002/per.499.
Prause, Nicole, and Cynthia A. Graham. “Asexuality: Classiﬁcation and Characterization.”
Archives of Sexual Behavior 36 (2007): 341–56. doi: 10.1007/s10508-006-9142-3.
Read, Simon, Michael King, and James Watson. “Sexual Dysfunction in Primary Medical Care:
Prevalence, Characteristics and Detection by the General Practitioner.” Journal of Public

[PDF page 329]

Health Medicine 19, no. 4 (1997): 387–91.
http://jpubhealth.oxfordjournals.org/content/19/4/387.full.pdf.
Reichl, Corinna, Johann F. Schneider, and Frank M. Spinath. “Relation of Self-Talk Frequency
to Loneliness, Need to Belong, and Health in German Adults.” Personality and Individual
Diﬀerences 54, no. 2 (2013): 241–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2012.09.003.
Reynolds, Sheila M., and Kent C. Berridge. “Emotional Environments Retune the Valence of
Appetitive Versus Fearful Functions in Nucleus Accumbens.” Nature Neuroscience 11
(2008): 423–25. doi:10.1038/nn2061.
Rumi, Mevlana Jalaludin. Teachings of Rumi (The Masnavi): The Spiritual Couplets of
Jalaludin Rumi. Translated by E. M. Whinﬁeld. London: Octagon Press, 1994.
Ryan, Christopher, and Cacilda Jethá. Sex at Dawn: The Prehistoric Origins of Modern
Sexuality. New York: Harper, 2010.
Sacks, Oliver. Hallucinations. New York: Vintage, 2012.
Sakaluk, John K., Leah M. Todd, Robin Milhausen, Nathan J. Lachowsky, and Undergraduate
Research Group in Sexuality. “Dominant Heterosexual Sexual Scripts in Emerging Adulthood:
Conceptualization and Measurement.” Journal of Sex Research (2013). doi:
10.1080/00224499.2012.745473.
Sanders, Stephanie A., Cynthia A. Graham, Jennifer L. Bass, and John Bancroft. “A Prospective
Study of the Eﬀects of Oral Contraceptives on Sexuality and Well-Being and Their
Relationship to Discontinuation.” Kinsey Institute, www.kinseyinstitute.org/publications/PDF/A
prospective study of the eﬀects of oral contraceptives on sexuality and well.htm.
Schwartz, Gary E., Serena-Lynn Brown, and Geoﬀrey L. Ahern. “Facial Muscle Patterning and
Subjective Experience During Aﬀective Imagery: Sex Diﬀerences.” Psychophysiology 17, no.
1 (1980): 75–82.
Schwarzer, Ralf, and Peter A. Frensch, eds. Personality, Human Development, and Culture.
New York: Psychology Press, 2010.
Shenhav, A., and W. B. Mendes. “Aiming for the Stomach and Hitting the Heart: Dissociable
Triggers and Sources for Disgust Reactions.” Emotion (2013).
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24219399.
Siew, Belinda, and Luan Khong. “Mindfulness: A Way of Cultivating Deep Respect for
Emotions.” Mindfulness 2, no. 1 (2011): 27–32. doi: 10.1007/s12671-010-0039-9.
Silverstein, R. Gina, Anne-Catharine H. Brown, Harold D. Roth, and Willoughby B. Britton.
“Eﬀects of Mindfulness Training on Body Awareness to Sexual Stimuli: Implications for
Female Sexual Dysfunction.” Psychosomatic Medicine 73, no. 9 (2011): 817–25.
Simmons, Joseph P., Leif D. Nelson, and Uri Simonsohn. “False-Positive Psychology
Undisclosed Flexibility in Data Collection and Analysis Allows Presenting Anything as
Signiﬁcant.” Psychological Science 22, no. 11 (2011): 1359–66.
Simons, Jeﬀrey, and Michael P. Carey. “Prevalence of Sexual Dysfunctions.” Archives of Sexual
Behavior 30, no. 2 (2001): 177–219. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2426773/.

[PDF page 330]

Stefanou, Christina, and Marita P. McCabe. “Adult Attachment and Sexual Functioning: A
Review of Past Research.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 9, no. 10 (2012): 2499–2507. doi:
10.1111/j.1743-6109.2012.02843.x.
Stice, Eric, Paul Rohde, and Heather Shaw. The Body Project: A Dissonance-Based Eating
Disorder Prevention Intervention. New York: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Stopes, Marie. Married Love. 1918. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Stroupe, Natalie N. How Diﬃcult Is Too Diﬃcult? The Relationships Among Women’s Sexual
Experience and Attitudes, Diﬃculty with Orgasm, and Perception of Themselves as
Orgasmic or Anorgasmic. Master’s thesis, University of Kansas, 2008.
http://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/dspace/handle/1808/4517.
Štulhofer, Aleksandar, Ana Alexandra Carvalheira, and Bente Træen. “Is Responsive Sexual
Desire for Partnered Sex Problematic Among Men? Insights from a Two-Country Study.”
Sexual and Relationship Therapy 28, no. 3 (2013): 246–58. doi:
10.1080/14681994.2012.756137.
Suhler, Christopher L., and Patricia Churchland. “Can Innate, Modular ‘Foundations’ Explain
Morality? Challenges for Haidt’s Moral Foundations Theory.” Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 23, no. 9 (2011): 2103–16. doi:10.1162/jocn.2011.21637.
Suschinsky, Kelly D., Martin L. Lalumière, and Meredith L. Chivers. “Sex Diﬀerences in Patterns
of Genital Sexual Arousal: Measurement Artifacts or True Phenomena?” Archives of Sexual
Behavior 38, no. 4 (2009): 559–73. doi: 10.1007/s10508-008-9339-8.
Taylor, Shelley E., and Sarah L. Master. “Social Responses to Stress: The Tend-and-Befriend
Model.” In The Handbook of Stress Science: Biology, Psychology, and Health, edited by
Richard J. Contrada and Andrew Baum, 101–11. New York: Springer, 2011.
ter Kuile, Moniek M., Daan Vigeveno, and Ellen Laan. “Preliminary Evidence That Acute and
Chronic Daily Psychological Stress Aﬀect Sexual Arousal in Sexually Functional Women.”
Behaviour Research and Therapy 45, no. 9 (2007): 2078–89.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2007.03.006.
Thomas, J. J., R. D. Crosby, S. A. Wonderlich, R. H. Striegel-Moore, and A. E. Becker. “A Latent
Proﬁle Analysis of the Typology of Bulimic Symptoms in an Indigenous Paciﬁc Population:
Evidence of Cross-Cultural Variation in Phenomenology.” Psychological Medicine 41, no. 1
(2011): 195–206. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291710000255.
Tiefer, Leonore. “Sex Therapy as a Humanistic Enterprise.” Sexual and Relationship Therapy
21, no. 3 (2006): 359–75. doi: 10.1080/14681990600740723.
Toates, Frederick. Biological Psychology. 3rd ed. New York: Prentice Hall/Pearson, 2011.
———. How Sexual Desire Works: The Enigmatic Urge. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
———. Motivational Systems. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986, 151–59.
Tolman, Deborah L. Dilemmas of Desire: Teenage Girls Talk About Sexuality. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2002.

[PDF page 331]

Tompkins, K. Brooke, Denise M. Martz, Courtney A. Rocheleau, and Doris G. Bazzini. “Social
Likeability, Conformity, and Body Talk: Does Fat Talk Have a Normative Rival in Female Body
Image Conversations?” Body Image 6, no. 4 (2009): 292–98.
Toulalan, Sarah. Imaging Sex: Pornography and Bodies in Seventeenth-Century England. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Tracey, Irene. “Getting the Pain You Expect: Mechanisms of Placebo, Nocebo and Reappraisal
Eﬀects in Humans.” Nature Medicine 16 (2010): 1277–83. doi:10.1038/nm.2229.
Tybur, Joshua M., Debra Lieberman, and Vladas Griskevicius. “Microbes, Mating, and Morality:
Individual Diﬀerences in Three Functional Domains of Disgust.” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 97, no. 1 (2009): 103–22. doi: 10.1037/a0015474.
Ullery, Elizabeth K., Vaughn S. Millner, Heath A. Willingham. “The Emergent Care and
Treatment of Women with Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder.” Family Journal 10, no. 3
(2002): 346–50. doi: 10.1177/10680702010003013.
UN Human Rights Council. Report of the Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. February 1, 2013. A/HRC/22/53.
US Department of Justice. Full Report of the Prevalence, Incidence, and Consequences of
Violence Against Women. November 2000. www.ncjrs.gov/pdﬃles1/nij/183781.pdf.
Van Dam, Nicholas T., Mitch Earleywine, and Sharon Danoﬀ-Burg. “Diﬀerential Item Function
Across Mediators and Non-Mediators on the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire.”
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences 47, no. 5 (2009): 516–21.
Van Dam, Nicholas T., Sean C. Sheppard, John P. Forsyth, and Mitch Earleywine. “Self-
compassion is a better predictor than mindfulness of symptom severity and quality of life in
mixed anxiety and depression.” Journal of Anxiety Disorders 25, no. 1 (2011): 123–130.
van de Velde, T. H. Ideal Marriage: Its Physiology and Technique. Trans. Stella Brown. New
York: Random House, 1926.
van Rooij, Kim, Saskia Poels, Jos Bloemers, Irwin Goldstein, Jeroen Gerritsen, Diana van Ham,
and Frederiek van Mameren, et al. “Toward Personalized Sexual Medicine (Part 3):
Testosterone Combined with a Serotonin1A Receptor Agonist Increases Sexual Satisfaction
in Women with HSDD and FSAD, and Dysfunctional Activation of Sexual Inhibitory
Mechanisms.” Journal of Sexual Medicine 10, no. 3 (2013): 824–37. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-
6109.2012.02982.x.
Varjonen, Markus, Pekka Santtila, Maria Höglund, Patrick Jern, Ada Johansson, Ingrid Wager,
Katarina Witting, Monica Ålgars, and N. Kenneth Sandnabba. “Genetic and Environmental
Eﬀects on Sexual Excitation and Sexual Inhibition in Men.” Journal of Sex Research 44, no. 4
(207): 359–69. doi: 10.1080/00224490701578653.
Wallen, Kim, and Elisabeth A. Lloyd. “Female Sexual Arousal: Genital Anatomy and Orgasm in
Intercourse.” Hormones and Behavior 59, no. 5 (2011): 780–92. doi:
10.1016/j.yhbeh.2010.12.004.

[PDF page 332]

Warber, Katie M., and Tara M. Emmers-Sommer. “The Relationships among Sex, Gender and
Attachment.” Language and Communications Quarterly 1 (2012): 60–81.
Wellcome Science. “Lie Back and Think of Science.” Issue 1, October 2005.
www.wellcome.ac.uk/stellent/groups/corporatesite/@msh_publishing_group/documents/web_
document/wtd019376.pdf?q=wellcomescience#page=44.
Williams, Mark, John Teasdale, Zindel Segal, Jon Kabat-Zinn. The Mindful Way through
Depression: Freeing Yourself from Chronic Unhappiness. New York: Guilford Press, 2007.
Wilson, S. K., J. R. Delk, and K. L. Billups. “Treating Symptoms of Female Sexual Arousal
Disorder with the Eros-Clitoral Therapy Device.” Journal of Gender Speciﬁc Medicine 4, no. 2
(2001): 54–58.
Witting, K., P. Santtila, F. Rijsdijk, M. Varjonen, P. Jern, A. Johansson, B. von der Pahlen, K.
Alanko, and N.K. Sandnabba. “Correlated Genetic and Non-Shared Environmental Inﬂuences
Account for the Co-Morbidity Between Female Sexual Dysfunctions.” Psychological Medicine
39, no. 1 (2009): 115–27.
Woertman, Liesbeth, and Femke van den Brink. “Body Image and Female Sexual Functioning
and Behavior: A Review.” Journal of Sex Research 49, no. 2 (2012): 184–211. doi:
10.1080/00224499.2012.658586.
World Health Organization. “Violence Against Women: Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence
against Women.” Fact sheet no. 239, October 2013.
www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs239/en/.
Wrosch, Carsten, Michael F. Scheier, Charles S. Carver, and Richard Schulz. “The Importance
of Goal Disengagement in Adaptive Self-Regulation: When Giving Up Is Beneﬁcial.” Self and
Identity 2 (2003): 1–20.
Yeshe, Lama Thubten. Introduction to Tantra: The Transformation of Desire.
ReadHowYouWant.com, 2010.
Zubieta, Jon-Kar, and Christian S. Stohler. “Neurobiological Mechanisms of Placebo
Responses.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1156 (2009): 198–210. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04424.x.

[PDF page 333]

notes
one: anatomy
1. Aristotle, Complete Master-Piece, 60.
2. Drysdale, Russell, and Glover, “Labiaplasty.”
3. Moran and Lee, “What’s Normal?”
4. The reality of the hymen is ﬁnally beginning to be discussed in the mainstream in the
form of documentaries like How to Lose Your Virginity and the media coverage related to
it (Feeney, “Living Myths About Virginity”).
5. Hegazy and Al-Rukban, “Hymen: Facts and Conceptions.”
6. This was in Talbot House in the fall semester of 2012. Hi, Talbot!
7. Not everyone is comfortable with the term “intersex.” Some people prefer “ambiguous
genitals,” and there’s currently a movement toward “disorders of sex development” or
DSD (see Dreger, “Why ‘Disorders of Sex Development’?”). I use “intersex” here because
it feels most appropriate for this nonmedical context.
8. As obvious as this idea seems, given the all-the-same-parts framework, it is actually a
radical idea that intersex activists have been ﬁghting hard to promote for several decades.
It’s the only view that makes biological sense, and again, it’s only from a cultural point of
view that anyone could think otherwise. And yet in too many places, standard medical
practice is to perform surgery to “normalize” the genitals (Organization Intersex, “Public
Statement”). Note that in 2013, the United Nations’ special rapporteur on torture included
these surgeries in his “Report on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment.” The report condemned medically unnecessary “normalizing” surgeries,
because “they can cause scarring, loss of sexual sensation, pain, incontinence and
lifelong depression and have also been criticized as being unscientiﬁc, potentially harmful
and contributing to stigma” (United Nations, “Special Report,” 18).
9. McDowell, Fryar, Ogden, and Flegal, “Anthropometric Reference Data.”
10. “Operation Beautiful” is responsible for this excellent phrase, www.operationbeautiful.com/.
two: the dual control model
1. Canner, Orgasm, Inc.
2. Bradford and Meston, “Correlates of Placebo Response.”
3. Janssen and Bancroft, “The Dual Control Model,” 197.

[PDF page 334]

4. Carpenter et al., “Sexual Excitation and Inhibition Proﬁles.”
5. A not-so-sensitive accelerator, on the other hand, regardless of brakes, is one predictor
of asexuality—people who don’t desire sexual contact (not “stones”—folks who only want
to touch their partners but don’t want to be touched themselves). In the handful of studies
on people who identify themselves as asexual, it turns out that they have signiﬁcantly less
accelerator than their sexual counterparts (Prause and Graham, “Asexuality”). There is no
diﬀerence in their brakes, however. So maybe part of the cause of asexuality as a sexual
orientation is that these women’s brains are not prone to noticing sexually relevant stimuli.
Of course this is only one part of the story, since asexuals represent only about 1 percent
of the general population and about 5 to10 percent of women score as low SES. Again,
there’s nothing broken or wrong; asexual people’s sexual response mechanisms are made
of all the same stuﬀ as sexual people’s, they’re just organized in a diﬀerent way.
6. Adapted from Milhausen et al., “Validation of the Sexual Excitation/Sexual Inhibition
Inventory.”
7. Carpenter et al., “Women’s Scores.”
8. Mental state impact on sexual interest:
  Increase
(%)
No
Change
(%)
Decrease
(%)
Depression      
Men 10 55 35
Women 9.5 40 50
Anxiety      
Men 25 58 17
Women 23 57 34
From Lykins, Janssen, and Graham, “Relationship Between Negative Mood and
Sexuality.” See also Janssen, Macapagal, and Mustanski, “Eﬀects of Mood on Sexuality.”
9. There is some genetic basis. Two studies published in 2005 independently found that
about 40 percent of the variability in women’s orgasmicity was attributable to genes
(Dawood, Kirk, Bailey, Andrews, and Martin, “Genetic and Environmental Inﬂuences”;
Dunn, Cherkas, and Spector, “Genetic and Environmental Inﬂuences”). More direct
evidence of a genetic basis for sexual response in men showed that around 36 percent of
SIS1 (the handbrake) is heritable, and a little under 20 percent of SIS2 (the foot brake)
(Varjonen et al., “Genetic and Environmental Eﬀects”). Intelligence, by contrast, has an
estimated heritability of from 30 to 80 percent, depending on what you’re measuring and
how (Jacobs et al., “Heritability Estimates of Intelligence in Twins”). To put that in

[PDF page 335]

concrete terms: Suppose you get chatting with the woman sitting next to you on a plane,
and it turns out she’s an identical twin. If she is very, very intelligent, then you have good
reason to expect her sister is also very, very intelligent. But if your conversation veers into
the domain of sexual pleasure and you learn that she is reliably orgasmic from vaginal
stimulation, there’s no particular reason to expect that her sister is, too.
10. Pfaus, “Neurobiology of Sexual Behavior.”
11. Pfaus, Kippin, and Coria-Avila, “Animal Models.”
12. Pfaus and Wilkins, “A Novel Environment.”
13. Note that this isn’t how human sexual orientation works. Little boys who grow up to be gay
are, most likely, born with a diﬀerent “proneness,” which gradually develops into a diﬀerent
orientation. Gay men’s natural proneness means that what they’re sensitive to is diﬀerent right
from birth, as far as we can tell, and they don’t need to experience anything sexual with
anyone in order to know intuitively whom they want to be sexual with, just as straight men
don’t need to try being sexual with anyone in order to know intuitively whom they want to be
sexual with. Obviously there’s a lot more to this subject, including how or whether any of this
applies to women’s sexual orientation; whole books have been written about it (e.g.,
Diamond, Sexual Fluidity). For now, I just want to make it clear that we’re not blank slates
who just learn whatever is put in front of us, sexually. Remember: There are some, though
few, aspects of our sexuality that are innate, organized in advance of experience.
14. Koos Slob et al., “Sexual Arousability and the Menstrual Cycle.”
three: context
1. 4 percent in Carpenter et al., “Sexual Excitation and Inhibition Proﬁles,” and 8 percent
in my considerably less science-y experience on my blog and in my classes.
2. McCall and Meston, “Cues Resulting in Desire,” and “Diﬀerences Between Pre- and
Postmenopausal Women.”
3. Graham, Sanders, Milhausen, and McBride, “Turning On and Turning Oﬀ.”
4. Gottman, The Science of Trust, 254.
5. Bergner, What Do Women Want? 68–73.
6. Graham, Sanders, and Milhausen, “Sexual Excitation/Sexual Inhibition Inventory.”
7. BBC News, “Words Can Change What We Smell.”
8. Aubrey, “Feeling a Little Blue.”
9. Ariely, Predictably Irrational.
10. Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi, “Flow Theory and Research,” 195–206.
11. Flaten, Simonsen, and Olsen, “Drug-Related Information.” Hat tip to Goldacre, “Nerdstock.”
12. Reynolds and Berridge, “Emotional Environments.”
13. Gottman, The Science of Trust, 192.

[PDF page 336]

14. There’s mounting evidence that in a variety of ways, in both rats and humans, context
changes how the midbrain responds to stimuli. Human brain imaging studies have found that
uncertainty and risk can inﬂuence NAc response (Abler et al., “Prediction Error”) and that the
NAc’s of people with chronic back pain respond diﬀerently to “noxious thermal stimulation”
(i.e., burning) compared with people who don’t live with pain (Baliki et al., “Predicting Value of
Pain”). Something particularly interesting about the study of brain functioning in people with
chronic back pain: When they directed their attention to the burning sensation on the skin of
their back, they reported that the heat hurt; when they directed their attention to the pain in
the muscles of their back, they reported that the heat felt good. Where we focus our attention
is part of context. The NAc even appears to be important in placebo studies (Zubieta and
Stohler, “Neurobiological Mechanisms of Placebo Responses; Tracey, “Getting the Pain You
Expect”). Remember the placebo eﬀect from chapter 2—about 40 percent of people taking a
sugar pill that they are told will increase their interest in sex, do indeed experience more
interest in sex. I expect that future research will ﬁnd that the nucleus accumbens is involved in
that eﬀect.
15. Berridge and Kringelbach, “Neuroscience of Aﬀect,” 295.
16. Jaak Panksepp and Lucy Bevin (Archaeology of Mind ) include in their taxonomy of the
limbic brain SEEKING, RAGE, FEAR, LUST, CARE, PANIC/GRIEF, and PLAY. Frederick
Toates includes, along with stress and sex, social behavior, aggression, and exploration
(Biological Psychology). Paul Ekman, using research on universal facial expressions,
theorizes the basic emotional categories of anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, and
surprise (Emotions Revealed ). It says a lot that there isn’t yet a single, universally agreed on
system for understanding the organization of our most basic emotional systems. Nor is there
a universally agreed on deﬁnition of what an emotion or a motivation is, or if they’re the same
thing or diﬀerent—though my references here will reveal my inclinations (Berridge and
Winkielman, “What is an unconscious emotion?”; Panksepp, “What is an emotional
feeling?”).
17. Meizner, “Sonographic Observation of In Utero Fetal ‘Masturbation.’ ”
18. Berridge, Mechanisms of Self-Control. The Harvard psychologist Daniel Gilbert described
Berridge as “one of the best neuroscientists in the world,” (Berridge et al., The Neuroscience
of Happiness), but I would distinguish him from other neuroscientists this way: As a source of
both the Iggy Pop rat study and the One Ring metaphor, he is the one and only author of rat
brain research who has made me LOL.
19.  Authors resort to quotation marks (Berridge’s “wanting” and “liking”) and capitals
(Panksepp and Bevin’s SEEKING etc. system in Archaeology of Mind ) in an eﬀort to
reinforce the distinction between conscious enjoying, expecting, and eagerness and
mesolimbic enjoying, expecting, and eagerness. To make that distinction in this book, I use a
shortcut metaphor throughout: When I talk about cognitive motivation, learning, and pleasure
or suﬀering (what people use to describe what they want, know, or feel), I say “you

[PDF page 337]

want/know/feel.” When I talk about aﬀective motivation, learning, and feelings (eagerness,
expecting, and enjoying), I say “your brain wants/knows/feels.”
20. Childress et al., “Prelude to Passion.”
four: emotional context
1. Porges, “Reciprocal Inﬂuences Between Body and Brain.”
2. Levine, In an Unspoken Voice, 55–56.
3. Lykins, Janssen, and Graham, “Relationship Between Negative Mood and Sexuality”;
ter Kuile, Vigeveno, and Laan, “Acute and Chronic Daily Psychological Stress”; Laumann
et al., “Sexual Problems Among Women and Men.”
4. Hamilton and Meston, “Chronic Stress and Sexual Function.”
5. Levine, In an Unspoken Voice, 8.
6. Inevitably, it’s more complicated than that. There is a brake that, in a healthy nervous
system, is linked with the autonomic gas pedal, so that when life hits the gas pedal, the
brake disengages, and when life relaxes the gas pedal, the brake reengages—the
neomammalian vagus, or “vagal brake” as Stephen Porges describes it. This is in
contrast to the reptilian vagus, which slows the heart and is the brake of “freeze” (Porges,
The Polyvagal Theory, 92–93).
7. It shows up over and over again in both fact and ﬁction, such as Forrest Gump’s, “I just
felt like running,” and, most memorably, in P. G. Wodehouse’s Performing Flea: “The
puppy was run over by a motor bike the other day and emerged perfectly unhurt but a bit
emotional. We had to chase him half across London before he simmered down. He just
started running and kept on running until he felt better.”
8.  If you know of some research on this, please do send me an email!
enagoski@gmail.com.
9. The World Health Organization reports that “35 percent of women worldwide have
experienced either intimate partner violence or non-partner sexual violence in their
lifetime” (WHO, “Violence Against Women” fact sheet). The US National Criminal Justice
Reference Services reports that about 18 percent of women in America are raped in their
lifetime; about 25 percent are raped, assaulted, or physically abused by their partner in
their lifetime, compared with 8 percent of men (US Department of Justice, Full Report).
10. US Department of Education, Oﬃce for Civil Rights, Boston, “Title IX and Sexual Assault:
Exploring New Paradigms for Prevention and Response,” March 24–25, 2011.
11. Lisak and Miller, “Repeat Rape and Multiple Oﬀending.”
12. For a clinical version of this categorization, see Gaﬀney, “Established and Emerging PTSD
Treatments.”
13. Ogden, Minton, and Pain, Trauma and the Body.
14. See Levine, Waking the Tiger and In an Unspoken Voice.

[PDF page 338]

15. Siew and Khong, “Mindfulness.”
16. Mitchell and Trask, “The Origin of Love.”
17. Hitchens, Hitch-22.
18. Acevedo et al., “Neural Correlates.”
19. Glass and Blum, “Unconditional Love Transcript.”
20. For a comprehensive review of the sex-attachment link, see Dewitte, Marieke, “Diﬀerent
perspectives on the sex-attachment link.”
21. Johnson, Hold Me Tight, 189.
22. Kinsale, Flower from the Storm, 431, 362.
23. Johnson, Love Sense, 121.
24. Feeney and Noller, “Attachment Style”; Bifulco et al., “Adult Attachment Style.”
25. Warber and Emmers-Sommer, “Relationships among Sex, Gender and Attachment.”
26. Items taken with permission from the Experiences in Close Relationships questionnaire
(Fraley, Waller, and Brennan, “Self-report measures of adult attachment”).
27. Stefanou and McCabe, “Adult Attachment and Sexual Functioning”; see also Birnbaum et
al., “When Sex Is More Than Just Sex,” and Cooper et al., “Attachment Styles, Sex Motives,
and Sexual Behavior.”
28. La Guardia et al., “Within-Person Variation in Security of Attachment.”
29. Davila, Burge, and Hammen, “Why Does Attachment Style Change?”
30. Taylor and Master, “Social Responses to Stress.”
31. David and Lyons-Ruth, “Diﬀerential Attachment Responses.”
32. The Loving Lab, www.lovinglab.com.
33. Rumi, Teachings of Rumi.
34. Ibid.
ﬁve: cultural context
1. van de Velde, Ideal Marriage, 145.
2. Hite, The Hite Report, 365.
3. Britton et al., “Fat Talk.”
4. Might this be starting to change? In one study, college women (mostly white) reported
that they would like a woman more if she talked positively about her body than if she
criticized her body—though they also reported that they expected other women to prefer a
woman who self-criticized (Tompkins et al., “Social Likeability”).
5. Woertman and van den Brink, “Body Image.”
6. Pazmany et al., “Body Image and Genital Self-Image.”
7. Longe et al., “Having a Word with Yourself.”
8. Powers, Zuroﬀ, and Topciu, “Covert and Overt Expressions of Self-Criticism.”
9. Gruen et al., “Vulnerability to Stress.”

[PDF page 339]

10. Dickerson and Kemeny, “Acute Stressors and Cortisol Response.”
11.  Besser, Flett, and Davis, “Self-Criticism, Dependency”; Cantazaro and Wei, “Adult
Attachment, Dependence”; Reichl, Schneider, and Spinath, “Relation of Self-Talk.”
12. Hayes and Tantleﬀ-Dunn, “Am I Too Fat to Be a Princess?”
13. At a 2009 conference on eating disorders, I attended a talk on the cultural origins of the “thin
ideal” (Gans, “What’s It All About?”), and this is what I learned: It’s all about social status—
men’s social status. The “thin ideal” in Western culture originates with notions of women as
property and status symbols.
In the seventeenth century, a softer, rounder, plumper female was the ideal because it
was only rich women who could aﬀord the buttery, ﬂoury food and the sedentary lifestyle
that allowed them to accumulate the abundant curves of the women in Rubens’s paintings.
Around the mid-nineteenth century, coinciding with the Industrial Revolution and the rise of
the middle class, it became fashionable for a man to advertise how rich he was by
marrying a woman who was too weak to work. It was a status symbol to have a wife who
was small, thin, and weak, barely able to totter daintily around the house, who not only
didn’t but couldn’t contribute to the household income. This is in contradiction to
everything evolution would have a woman be: robust, healthy, strong, tall, able healthfully
to conceive, gestate, give birth to, and breast-feed multiple oﬀspring.
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, body shape is still a marker of social status—rich women
can aﬀord real food (rather than processed crap) and have the leisure time for exercise.
But always these fashions around what shape a woman’s body “should” be are about
social class. They have nothing to do with fertility (on the contrary), nothing to do with an
“evolved preference,” except insofar as we have an evolved preference for higher social
status, and nothing to do with promoting women’s health.
So can you trust what your culture taught you about what your body should look like?
14. Bacon, “The HAES Manifesto.”
15. Haidt’s website, moralfoundations.org, describes the foundations in more detail. But for an
important critique, see Suhler and Churchland’s “Can Innate, Modular ‘Foundations’ Explain
Morality?”
16. See, just for a start, Yeshe, Introduction to Tantra.
17. It is not, however, identical. There are diﬀerent categories of stimuli, such as “body boundary
violations,” which are about body-envelope damage and often relate to blood and physical
pain, and “core disgust,” related to digestion. These two kinds of disgust produce
distinguishable reactions (Shenhav and Mendes, “Aiming for the Stomach”).
18. Mesquita, “Emoting: A Contextualized Process.”
19. Borg and de Jong, “Feelings of Disgust.”
20. Tybur, Lieberman, and Griskevicius, “Microbes, Mating, and Morality.”
21. Graham, Sanders, and Milhausen, “Sexual Excitation/Sexual Inhibition Inventory.”

[PDF page 340]

22.  de Jong et al., “Disgust and Contamination Sensitivity”; Borg, de Jong, and Schultz,
“Vaginismus and Dyspareunia”; for a review, see de Jong, Overveld, and Borg, “Giving in to
Arousal.”
23. Neﬀ, “Self-Compassion, Self-Esteem, and Well-Being.”
24. Adapted from www.self-compassion.org/self_compassion_exercise.pdf. See link for more
ideas.
25. Stice, Rohde, and Shaw, Body Project, 95.
26. Germer, Mindful Path to Self-Compassion, 150.
27. Hawkins et al., “Thin-Ideal Media Image.”
28. Becker et al., “Eating Behaviours and Attitudes.”
29. Becker, Body, Self, and Society, 56.
30. In Becker et al., “Validity and Reliability,” 35 percent of participants reported purging in the
last twenty-eight days, using a traditional herbal purgative, but Thomas et al., “Latent Proﬁle
Analysis,” report only 74 percent of those using the traditional purgative said they did so
speciﬁcally for weight loss, as opposed to, for example, medical reasons.
31. The aliveness of the simultaneous pressures of the moral model and the media model in
particular are observable in the perpetuation of the “Madonna-whore” construction of
women’s sexuality. To witness how this is enacted in young women’s sexuality, I recommend
Tolman’s Dilemmas of Desire (2009).
six: arousal
1. Suschinsky, Lalumière, and Chivers, “Sex Diﬀerences in Patterns of Genital Sexual
Arousal”; Bradford and Meston, “Impact of Anxiety on Sexual Arousal.”
2.  Peterson, Janssen, and Laan, “Women’s Sexual Responses to Heterosexual and
Lesbian Erotica.”
3. If you run the same experiment but use a thermistor (a little clip that attaches to the
inner labia and measures its temperature as a proxy for blood ﬂow) instead of the
photoplethysmograph, you’ll get slightly more overlap (Henson, Rubin, and Henson,
“Consistency of Objective Measures”). If you use magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to
get very precise measurements of changes in blood ﬂow to the pelvis, you’ll get slightly
less overlap (Hall, Binik, and Di Tomasso, “Concordance Between Physiological and
Subjective Measures”). If you get really high tech and measure not just vaginal blood ﬂow
and subjective arousal but also brain activity using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), you’ll ﬁnd out that genital response does not overlap with women’s brain activity
(Arnow et al., “Women with Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder”).
4. Bergner, “Women Who Want to Want”; Bergner, What Do Women Want?; Ryan and
Jethá, Sex at Dawn, 272–73, 278; Magnanti, The Sex Myth, 14.
5. Angier, “Conversations/Ellen T. M. Laan.”

[PDF page 341]

6. Both, Everaerd, and Laan, “Modulation of Spinal Reﬂexes”; Laan, Everaerd, and Evers,
“Assessment of Female Sexual Arousal.”
7. Suschinsky, Lalumière, and Chivers, “Patterns of Genital Sexual Arousal.” Hat tip to
Kelly Suchinsky and Meredith Chivers for actually sitting down with me and letting me see
the clips. Man, that League of Their Own scene is sad.
8. A recent special issue of Biological Psychology was devoted to concordance research,
and none of it was sex research (Hollenstein and Lanteigne, “Models and Methods of
Emotional Concordance”).
9. Matejka et al., “Talking About Emotion.”
10. Buck, “Prime Theory.”
11. Greenwald, Cook, and Lang, “Aﬀective Judgment and Psychophysiological Response.”
12. Kring and Gordon, “Sex Diﬀerences in Emotion”; Schwartz, Brown, and Ahern, “Facial
Muscle Patterning.”
13. Gottman and Silver, What Makes Love Last?
14. Hess, “Women Want Sex.”
15. James, Fifty Shades of Grey, 275.
16. Ibid.
17. Ibid., 293.
18. Koehler, “From the Mouths of Rapists.”
19. Toulalan, Imagining Sex.
20. Moore, “Rep. Todd Akin.” Akin initially apologized for the statement but in 2014 wrote that
he regretted the apology because stress—which rape certainly causes—interferes with
fertility, and that is what he meant by “shut the whole thing down” (Erika Eichelberger, “Todd
Akin is not sorry for his insane rape comments”). To be clear, then: His opinion as a former
(and potentially future) lawmaker is that if a woman doesn’t have a miscarriage, she can’t
have been “legitimately” raped.
21. This has been replicated for the last two decades, but the ﬁrst evidence was Morokoﬀ and
Heiman, “Eﬀects of Erotic Stimuli on Sexually Functional and Dysfunctional Women.”
22. Bobby Henderson, Church of the Flying Spaghetti Monster, “Open Letter to Kansas School
Board,” www.venganza.org/about/open-letter/.
23. Bloemers et al., “Inductions of Sexual Arousal in Women.”
24. Basson, “Biopsychosocial Models.”
25. Balzer, Alexandra M. “Eﬃcacy of Bibliotherapy as a Treatment for Low Sexual Desire in
Women”; Lankveld, Jacques van, “Self-help Therapies for Sexual Dysfunction”; Frühauf,
Gerger, Schmidt, Munder, and Barth, “Eﬃcacy of psychological interventions for sexual
dysfunction.”
26. Adriaan Tuiten, Emotional Brain, www.emotionalbrain.nl/about-eb.
27. Bloemers et al., “Toward Personalized Sexual Medicine (Part 1)”; Poels et al., “Toward
Personalized Sexual Medicine (Part 2)”; van Rooij et al., “Toward Personalized Sexual

[PDF page 342]

Medicine (Part 3).”
28. Speciﬁcally: from an average rating of 2.51 without the drug to an average of 2.98 with the
drug, on a scale of 1 to 5 (van Rooij et al., “Toward Personalized Sexual Medicine [Part 3]);
note that this result is statistically signiﬁcant. For a thorough critique of statistics in
psychological research, see Simmons, Nelson, and Simonsohn, “False-Positive Psychology.”
29. I choose these three examples based on the treatment group in the study. Participants were
divided into two groups: those who responded to testosterone plus a standard erectile
dysfunction drug (the “control group”) and those who did not (the “treatment group”). The two
groups were the same in terms of age, body mass index, race (it was almost exclusively white
women), menopausal status, and birth control use. The treatment group was found to be
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the control group in three ways: Women in the treatment group had
more children, tended to be in longer relationships, and were more than twice as likely to
report a history of negative sexual experiences. The only diﬀerences between the groups
were these three factors—these three contextual factors—of children, relationship duration,
and life history.
30. Jozkowski et al., “Women’s Perceptions about Lubricant Use.”
seven: desire
1. Basson, “The Female Sexual Response.”
2. These numbers are estimates, not to be taken too literally; what matters isn’t the
speciﬁc proportion but the reliable diﬀerence in a wide range of sexual behaviors and
thoughts assessed as “desire.” I oﬀer these ﬁgures based on research results such as the
following:
• Among 225 forty-year-old Danish women, 32.4 percent reported never experiencing
“spontaneous libido” (Garde and Lunde, “Female Sexual Behavior”).
• 33 percent of 1,749 women in the United States reported lack of interest in or desire for
sex (Michael et al., Sex in America). In the same study, 16 percent of men reported the
same lack of interest in sex.
• Among a mostly college-age sample, 28 percent of women and 5 percent of men
reported desiring sex once per week or less; 7 percent of women and 52 percent of men
reported desiring sex at least once a day (Beck, Bozman, and Qualtrough, “The
Experience of Sexual Desire”).
• 29 percent of 853 American women reported “thinking about sex with interest or desire”
less than once a week in the last month; 14 percent thought about sex with interest or
desire daily (Bancroft, Loftus, and Long, “Distress About Sex”).
• In a multiethnic sample of 3,248 women age forty to ﬁfty-ﬁve, 42 percent reported feeling
a desire for sex two or fewer times in the last month (Cain et al., “Sexual Functioning”); 30
percent reported desiring sex between once a week and every day.

[PDF page 343]

•  30.7 percent of 3,687 Portuguese women reported that they typically or always
accessed desire only once they were aroused (Carvalheira, Brotto, and Leal, “Women’s
Motivations for Sex”); in this study, about 12 percent of women “often” fantasized about
sex and 12 percent “very often or always” initiated sex with their partners.
•  Among Norwegian and Portuguese men age eighteen to seventy-ﬁve, 74 percent
presented with spontaneous desire, 2.5 percent with responsive desire, and 24 percent
with what the authors call “decreased” desire (Štulhofer, Carvalheira, and Træen,
“Insights from a Two-Country Study”). The sole predictive diﬀerence among the groups
was “proneness to relationship-related sexual boredom,” which I speculate may be
associated with sensitive SES.
3. Laan and Both, “What Makes Women Experience Desire?”
4. Hendrickx, Gijs, and Enzlin, “Prevalence Rates of Sexual Diﬃculties.”
5. Dawson and Chivers, “Gender Diﬀerences and Similarities in Sexual Desire.”
6.  Of course, it varies from individual to individual as well. Scenario 1 might feel
spontaneous for a person with a brake that is less sensitive to stress, and Scenario 3
might feel responsive for a person with an accelerator that requires more stimulation
before arousal stoked from a distance ﬁnally sparks into desire. But the general process is
the same for everyone. Arousal plus the right context—the right external circumstances
and internal state—equals desire.
7. Kaplan, Sexual Desire Disorders.
8. Toates, How Sexual Desire Works, chap. 3.
9. Beach, “Characteristics of Masculine ‘Sex Drive.’ ” For a brief discussion of the history
of the conceptualization of sex as a drive, see Heiman and Pfaﬀ, “Sexual Arousal and
Related Concepts.”
10. Williams, Teasdale, Segal, and Kabat-Zinn, The Mindful Way through Depression.
11. Duﬀey, The Relations of the Sexes; Foster, The Social Emergency. Alas, this reasoning,
oﬀered in the laudable hope that it will protect women from the sexual entitlement of men, has
often swayed to the opposite extreme, advocating absolute abstinence. This is why
recognizing that it’s an incentive motivation system, as natural as exploration, play, and
curiosity, is so important.
12. Fulu et al., Why Do Some Men Use Violence Against Women?
13. Bitzer, Giraldi, and Pfaus, “Sexual Desire and Hypoactive Sexual Desire.”
14. For a more precise and scientiﬁc description of the little monitor (for example, that there isn’t
actually a little monitor), see Carver and Scheier, “Self-Regulation of Action and Aﬀect.”
15. It could also be to avoid something—these are “antigoals” and they are the targets of
discrepancy enlarging, rather than reducing, feedback loops (Carver and Scheier,
“Cybernetic Control Processes”).
16. Schwarzer and Frensch, Personality, Human Development, and Culture, chap. 1.
17. Wrosch et al., “Importance of Goal Disengagement,” 370.

[PDF page 344]

18. Toates, Motivational Systems.
19. In comparative psychology, the phenomenon of curiosity is studied as “Exploration,” per
Toates, Biological Psychology, 404–6, or “SEEKING,” per Panksepp and Bevin,
Archaeology of Mind, chapter 3.
20. Toates, Biological Psychology.
21. Three of sex therapist Jack Morin’s “Four Cornerstones of Eroticism” are about discrepancy-
reducing feedback loop processes—the little monitor: “longing and anticipation,” “violating
prohibitions,” and “overcoming ambivalence.” Only “searching for power” isn’t speciﬁcally
and immediately about this process of “closing the gap” (The Erotic Mind ).
22. There are some cases when hormones might be involved in desire issues, mostly involving
medical issues. For example, some women who have double oophorectomies (removal of the
ovaries) before the age of forty-ﬁve may be more likely to experience low desire. And there
may be a subgroup of women—about 15 percent—whose sexual arousability is testosterone
dependent, primarily while taking hormonal contraception; speciﬁcally, their sexual response
mechanism may have low sensitivity to testosterone, so they require more of it before their
sexual interest kicks in (Bancroft and Graham, “Varied Nature of Women’s Sexuality”).
About a third of women experience a decrease in sexual interest when they’re on the
birth control pill, about a ﬁfth of women experience an increase in their interest in sex, and
the remaining half experience no particular change (Sanders et al., “A Prospective
Study”). So if your interest in sex went down when you started on hormonal contraception
and you’d like it to go back up, switch to a diﬀerent pill, or try the ring, IUD, implant, or any
other hormonal birth control method. Every woman’s body responds diﬀerently to diﬀerent
hormone combinations.
It has also been found that the much-touted decrease in women’s interest in sex as
they age is associated with age itself, not with hormones (Erekson et al., “Sexual Function
in Older Women”). It’s complicated, and there are exceptions of course, but a good rule of
thumb is that hormones can help with genital/peripheral issues—pain, dryness, sensation,
etc.—but not with brain/central issues, and desire is a brain issue (Basson, “Hormones
and Sexuality”).
23. Brotto et al., “Predictors of Sexual Desire Disorders.”
24. Perel, “The Secret to Desire in a Long-Term Relationship.”
25. Gottman, The Science of Trust, p. 257.
26. Charles Carver has suggested that pleasure could be a signal that we can stop paying
attention to one thing and shift it to something more dissatisfying (“Pleasure as a Sign”).
27. This idea is actually the topic of my dissertation research, which modeled, in an artiﬁcial
world, how the movement of a disease through a population changed based on the relative
distribution (Nagoski et al., “Risk, Individual Diﬀerences, and Environment”).
28. Lewandowski and Aron, “Distinguishing Arousal from Novelty.”
29. Ibid.

[PDF page 345]

30. Gollwitzer and Oettingen, “Implementation Intentions.”
31. MacPhee, Johnson, and van Der Veer, “Low Sexual Desire in Women”—cf. Ullery, Millner,
and Willingham, “Emergent Care and Treatment of Women,” and Tiefer, “Sex Therapy as a
Humanistic Enterprise.”
eight: orgasm
1.  Kinsey and colleagues (1948, 158) deﬁned orgasm as “a sudden release which
produces local spasms or more extensive or all-consuming convulsions.” Masters and
Johnson’s (1966, 6) “orgasmic phase” was “those few seconds during which the
vasoconcentration [constriction of blood vessels] and myotonia [muscle constriction]
developed from sexual stimuli are released. This involuntary climax is reached at any level
that represents maximum sexual tension increment for the particular occasion.” You’ll
notice these are more inclusive than the twenty-ﬁrst-century “consensus that a woman’s
orgasm involves a transient peak of intense sexual pleasure associated with rhythmic
contractions of the pelvic circumvaginal musculature, often with concomitant uterine and
anal contractions” (Bianchi-Demicheli and Ortigue, “Toward an Understanding of Cerebral
Substrates,” 2646). This “consensus” deﬁnition contradicts the research on
nonconcordance and on the contextual absence of pleasure with orgasm.
2. Levin and Wagner, “Orgasm in Women in the Laboratory.”
3. Bohlen et al., “The Female Orgasm.”
4. Alzate, Useche, and Villegas, “Heart Rate Change.”
5.  And there is a lot happening in your brain. For a review, see Georgiadis et al.,
“Sweetest Taboo.”
6. Herbenick and Fortenberry, “Exercise-Induced Orgasm.”
7. Levin and van Berlo, “Sexual Arousal and Orgasm.”
8. Research has found that approximately 30 percent of women experience nocturnal
orgasm (Mah and Binik, “The Nature of Human Orgasm”).
9. LoPiccolo and LoPiccolo, Handbook of Sex Therapy.
10. It’s also true that diﬀerent parts of the brain “light up” during vaginal stimulation compared to
clitoral stimulation (Komisaruk et al., “Women’s Clitoris, Vagina, and Cervix”). Diﬀerent parts
of your brain map onto diﬀerent parts of your body. But we don’t call them “vaginal
somatosensory cortex orgasms” and “clitoral somatosensory cortex orgasms.” Women with
spinal cord injuries may even bypass the spine altogether and generate orgasm through
stimulation of a cranial nerve that travels directly between the cervix and the brain
(Komisaruk et al., “Brain Activation”). And those aren’t “cranial nerve orgasms”; they’re
orgasms, no qualiﬁer necessary. Regardless of what body parts or which brain areas are
stimulated, the process is the same: Orgasm is the sudden release of sexual tension.

[PDF page 346]

11. This number has been replicated multiple times, using multiple methodologies, in multiple
studies, including Kinsey’s female volume and The Hite Report. The highest rate of
penetration during masturbation I’ve seen comes from a 2007 study where women
responded to the statement, “I use vibrators or introduce some objects into the vagina”; 21.4
percent said yes at least sometimes (Carvalheira and Leal, “Masturbation Among Women”).
It’s important to note that vibrators are typically used externally; Davis, Blank, Lin, and
Bonillas (“Characteristics of Vibrator Use among Women”) found that 3 percent (3 out of
115) of women masturbated with a vibrator “primarily” in their vaginas and 24 percent
(36/115) with the vibrator on “various genital sites,” which might include the vagina; 14
percent (11 out of 79) reported primarily an “in and out” movement of the vibrator; and 79
percent of women reported that clitorial-vibrator stimulation during solo masturbation “usually
or always resulted in orgasm,” 30 percent reported that vaginal-vibrator stimulation did so.
In addition, according to Hite (1976), 1.5 percent of women masturbate exclusively with
vaginal penetration; 5 percent of women always enter their vaginas during masturbation; 1
percent penetrate the vagina at orgasm, with one hand also stimulating the vulva; another
1 percent penetrate the vagina to obtain lubrication. Kinsey et al. (1953, 161) note an
anatomical distinction between the vagina and the introitus:
Many of those who reported “vaginal penetrations” in masturbation failed to
distinguish the vestibule of the vagina (which is well equipped with nerve endings)
from the vagina itself (which is poorly equipped or devoid of nerve endings). In
many instances, the female’s ﬁngers had been inserted only far enough beyond the
musculature ring which lives at the vaginal entrance (the introitus) to provide a ﬁrm
hold for the rest of her hand while it was stimulating the outer portions of her
genitalia.
12. This is another number that has been replicated using multiple methodologies for the better
part of a century. For a thorough review, see Lloyd, Case of the Female Orgasm, and Levin,
“The Human Female Orgasm.”
13. Wallen and Lloyd, “Female Sexual Arousal.”
14.  For a thorough review of the G-spot research, see my article at
https://medium.com/@enagoski/the-deﬁnitive-answer-to-the-question-does-the-g-spot-exist-
5d962de0c34c.
15. See, for example, Glickman and Emirzian, The Ultimate Guide to Prostate Pleasure.
16. Certainly there are those who disagree with Lloyd’s conclusion—the authors of the other
twenty-one theories she rejects, just for a start.
17. Meston et al., “Women’s Orgasm.”
18. Colson, “Female Orgasm.”
19. Graham, “DSM Diagnostic Criteria.” In a study of a random sample of Australian women, 8
percent reported “diﬃculty plus distress” (Hayes et al., “ ‘True’ Prevalence of Female Sexual

[PDF page 347]

Dysfunctions”); in a study of a large population sample, 10 percent of women reported
“diﬃculty plus distress” (Witting et al., “Correlated Genetic and Non-Shared Environmental
Inﬂuences”); of seventeen thousand Flemish women, 6.5 percent reported “orgasm
dysfunction” (Hendrickx, Gijs, and Enzlin, “Prevalence Rates of Sexual Diﬃculties”).
20. Armstrong, England, and Fogarty, “Accounting for Women’s Orgasms.” What was the best
kind of stimulation for orgasm with a new partner? Stimulating your clitoris with your own
hand.
21. Stroupe, “How Diﬃcult Is Too Diﬃcult?”
22. Read, King, and Watson, “Sexual Dysfunction in Primary Medical Care,” found 7 percent in
a general clinical sample.
23. Simons and Carey, “Prevalence of Sexual Dysfunctions,” found 7–10 percent in their review
of research. Note that 80 percent of women with “lifelong” anorgasmia are eﬀectively treated
with psychological interventions (Heiman, “Psychologic Treatments for Female Sexual
Dysfunction”), which is one of several reasons that I suspect that the number of women with
truly lifelong anorgasmia is substantially less than 5–10 percent. For a more comprehensive
review of this issue, see my blog post at
http://www.thedirtynormal.com/blog/2014/07/17/women-never-orgasm/.
24. Kingsberg et al., “Characterization of Orgasmic Diﬃculties.”
25. Wellcome Science, “Lie Back and Think of Science.” Half of the research participants not
wearing socks achieved orgasm, but that number went up to 80 percent when they kept their
socks on.
26. Kylstra, “10 Lessons About the Female Orgasm.”
27. Toates, Motivational Systems, 159.
28. Wilson, Delk, and Billups, “Treating Symptoms.”
29. Herbenick et al., “Prevalence and Characteristics of Vibrator Use.”
30. Marcus, “Changes in a Woman’s Sexual Experience.”
nine: meta-emotions
1. Sacks, Hallucinations, 88–89.
2. Ellin, “More Women Look Over the Counter.”
3. Sakaluk et al., “Dominant Heterosexual Sexual Scripts.”
4. Baer, “Construct Validity of the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire.”
5. Ibid.; Van Dam, Earleywine, and Danoﬀ-Burg, “Diﬀerential Item Function”; Baer et al.,
“Using Self-Report Assessment Methods”; Silverstein et al., “Eﬀects of Mindfulness
Training.” (This last paper concludes, unaccountably, that interoception—awareness of
one’s body—is what made the diﬀerence, even though the “observe” factor did not
change signiﬁcantly and the “nonjudge” factor changed the most signiﬁcantly.)

[PDF page 348]

6. Hoge et al., “Mindfulness and Self-Compassion in Generalized Anxiety Disorder.” In a
similar study of both anxiety and depression, this one comparing the Mindful Attention
Awareness Scale (MAAS) and the Self-Compassion Scale referred to in chapter 5, self-
compassion was a better predictor than mindfulness—awareness alone, that is—of quality
of life (Van Dam, Sheppard, Forsyth, and Earleywine, “Self-compassion is a better
predictor”).
7. Mize and Iantaﬃ, “Place of Mindfulness in a Sensorimotor Psychotherapy Intervention.”
8. Gottman and DeClaire, The Heart of Parenting, 21–22; Gottman, Science of Trust.
9. Similar ideas about setting better goals are suggested in the model of “Good Enough
Sex” (GES) developed by Michael Metz and Barry McCarthy and described in their book
Enduring Desire: Your Guide to Lifelong Intimacy. To maintain sexual satisfaction in long-
term relationships, GES emphasizes realistic expectations, broader ideas about
playfulness and satisfaction, ﬂexibility, variability, asynchrony (not experiencing the same
thing at the same time), and understanding your partner’s “erotic ﬂow pattern.” McCarthy
and Wald, “Mindfulness and Good Enough Sex”; Metz and McCarthy, “The ‘Good-
Enough Sex’ Model.”

[PDF page 349]

index
A note about the index: The pages referenced in this index refer to the page numbers in the print
edition. Clicking on a page number will take you to the ebook location that corresponds to the
beginning of that page in the print edition. For a comprehensive list of locations of any word or
phrase, use your reading system’s search function.
Page numbers in italics refer to illustrations
Abusive relationships, 75, 134, 283, 304–5
Acute stressors, 120
Additive integration, 283, 284
Akin, Todd, 210, 357n20
Alternate initiation technique, 252–53
Ambulatory laboratory study, 212–13
American Psychiatric Association, 45, 231
Amygdala, 84
Anatomy, 15–41
changing one’s view of, 37–38
of the clitoris, 17, 20–23, 22
of the hymen, 27–29
importance of appreciating variation in, 34–37
intersex, 32
medieval beliefs on, 16–17, 205
of the penis, 21, 22
pre-birth development of, 18–20, 19
terminology in, 29
of the vulva, 26–27, 27
Anger, 250–51, 315–16
Animal studies. See Bonobo copulation, images of; Monkeys, studies involving; Rats,
experiments involving
Anorgasmia, 45, 280, 364n24
Anus, 19, 27
Anxiety, 60

[PDF page 350]

Anxious attachment style, 139–40, 141
Approach behaviors. See What’s this? behaviors
Aristophanes, 131
Arousal
desire, context, and, 226–29
in the dual control model, 4, 51–53
in the triphasic model, 45
Arousal contingency, 53
Arousal nonconcordance, 3, 6, 191–222, 195, 294
changing one’s attitude toward, 325
errors about, 202–13
measuring and deﬁning, 193–97
medication and, 213–15
nonconcordance in other emotions, 199–201
orgasm and, 269
resolving problems generated by, 217–20
Art, 122
Asexuality, 348n5
Attachment. See Love/attachment
Austen, Jane, 159
Avoidance behaviors. See What the hell is this? behaviors
Avoidant attachment style, 139–40, 141
Backdraft, 182
Bacon, Linda, 169
Bancroft, John, 4, 48
Barbarella (ﬁlm), 287
Bartholin’s glands, 30
Beach, Frank, 230, 231
Beauty, recognizing one’s own, 162–65
Becoming Orgasmic (Heiman and LoPiccolo), 266
Behavioral view of sex, 3–5
Bergner, Daniel, 75, 135, 206
Berridge, Kent, 86
Blast from the Past (ﬁlm), 301
Blastocysts, 20
Blum, Deborah, 135
Body scans, 122
Body self-criticism, 153–54, 156, 163–67, 187, 329, 353n4
clinging to, 166–67, 177

[PDF page 351]

cognitive dissonance vs., 182
consequences of, 163
self-compassion vs., 177–78
Bonobo copulation, images of, 194, 207, 208
Bottom-up approach to coping with trauma, 128–29
Brain, 40
arousal nonconcordance and, 197–99, 221–22
context and, 75–76, 80–83, 94
desire and, 233–34
dual control model and, 48, 60
imaging studies of, 132
pleasure centers of, 84
stress and, 117–18
Brain stem parabrachial nucleus, 84
Breathing technique, 268
Brotto, Lori, 238–39
Buck, Ross, 199
Bulb of penis, 22
Bulb of vestibule, 22, 274–75
Camilla (composite), 7, 149, 326
arousal nonconcordance and, 191–92, 221
context and, 70–71, 92–93
cultural messages and, 161–62
desire and, 225, 228–29
dual control model and, 58–59
on genital diversity, 33–34
orgasm and, 278–79, 314–15
trauma and, 126–27
Carpopedal spasms, 44
Central nervous system, 48, 197–99
Challenges, meaningful, 246–47
Chamberlin, Kristen, 129
Chasing dynamic, 89, 226, 238, 318
described, 245
desperate measures to defuse, 251–55
Chivers, Meredith, 194, 210
Christmas Carol, A (Dickens), 145–46
Chronic stressors, 120–21
Circumcision (male), 26

[PDF page 352]

Clitoral hood, 22, 23
Clitoris, 19, 20–25, 44
anatomy of, 17, 20–23, 22
distance between urethra and, 16, 274
early scientiﬁc view of, 277
manual exploration of, 23
orgasm through stimulation of, 272, 274, 275, 292, 322
size of, 15–16, 205–6
visual exploration of, 23–25, 41
Cocaine addicts, study of, 90
Coﬀey, Kelly, 168–69
Cognitive-based therapy, 128
Cognitive dissonance, 156, 182
Common humanity, 178, 317
Conception-arousal myth, 210, 276, 277
Condoms, 219, 220
Context, 5–6, 70–108. See also Cultural context; Emotional context
arousal nonconcordance and, 212–13
desire and, 223–29, 239
dual control model and, 65, 67–68, 78–79, 92
importance of understanding, 91–92
meta-emotions and, 322–23
orgasm and, 270–71, 280, 282–86
placebo eﬀect and, 47
pleasure and, 291, 302
sensation and, 77–83, 94
two elements in, 75
worksheets, 95–108
Corpora cavernosa, 21, 22
Corpus spongiosum, 21, 22
Cosmopolitan (magazine), 161
Cowper’s gland, 30
Criterion velocity, 235–36, 281, 289, 300
changing, 320–21
deﬁned, 235
Crura of clitoris, 21, 22
Crura of penis, 22
Crying, 122, 137–38, 290
Cues for sexual desire

[PDF page 353]

study, 72–73
worksheet, 107–8
Cujo (ﬁlm), 194
Cultural context, 6, 153–88. See also Body self-criticism; Media Message; Medical Message;
Moral Message
the clitoris in, 21
desire and, 243–44
disgust and, 156, 170–77, 188
dual control model and, 62
media literacy and, 183–84
self-compasion and, 177–81
self-trust and, 184–87
stress response cycle and, 120–21, 146
the vulva in, 26
weight and, 167–70, 187
Cum hoc ergo propter hoc fallacy, 211
Curiosity, 226, 237–38, 241, 296
Dams, 219
De Botton, Alain, 209
Depression, 60, 165, 270
Desire, 4, 223–61. See also Responsive desire; Spontaneous desire
as arousal in context, 226–29
arousal nonconcordance and, 221–22
the chasing dynamic and, 89, 226, 238, 245, 251–55, 318
cues for, 72–73, 107–8
cultural context and, 243–44
as curiosity, 226, 237–38, 241, 296
hormones and, 16, 226, 238–39, 360n20
as an incentive motivation system, 230–31, 232
key to managing, 237
the little monitor and, 234–38, 240, 257
maximizing, with science, 245–55
missing from four-phase model, 45
monogamy and, 226, 238, 239–42
research results on, 358–59n2
testosterone-dependent, 16, 360n20
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 45
Dickens, Charles, 145–46
Disgust, 156, 170–77, 188, 355n17

[PDF page 354]

Dopamine, 135
Dual control model, 4, 42–69. See also Sexual accelerator; Sexual brake; Sexual excitation
system; Sexual inhibition system
arousability and, 51–53
changing the systems in, 66–69
context and, 65, 67–68, 78–79, 92
development of, 48
gender diﬀerences in, 47, 60–61, 64–66
learned responses and, 61–63
mechanism of action, 48
sexual diﬃculties and, 66
Eagerness, 84–91, 94, 351n19
arousal nonconcordance and, 205, 211
body self-criticism and, 164
characteristics of, 86
context and, 87–88
desire and, 240–41, 252
love/attachment and, 86, 132, 133, 135, 137
stress and, 118
Eating disorders, 119–20, 183, 354n13
Eﬀort, changing the kind of, 322–23
Ejaculation
female, 30–31
male, 30
Emotion I, 199–200
Emotion II, 200
Emotion III, 200
Emotion coaching, 310–12
Emotion dismissing, 310–12, 318–20
Emotional context, 111–52. See also Love/attachment; Meta-emotions; Stress
Emotional One Ring, 76, 84–89, 177, 234, 282, 300, 351n18. See also Eagerness; Enjoying;
Expecting
arousal nonconcordance and, 196
arousing, 245–47
disgust and, 172
love/attachment and, 112, 113, 145
stress and, 112, 113, 115, 145
systems of, 84–85
Emotionally Focused Couples Therapy, 142

[PDF page 355]

Enjoying, 84–91, 94, 351n19
arousal nonconcordance and, 196, 205, 206–11, 218, 222
characteristics of, 85
context and, 87–88
desire and, 240–41
love/attachment and, 132, 133, 137
stress and, 118
Enya, 292
Erectile dysfunction medication, 46, 66, 196–97, 239, 357–58n29
development of new, 213–15
placebo eﬀect of, 47, 197
Erection (male), 30, 203
Escher girls, 33, 162
Excitement (sexual response phase), 44, 45
Exercise/physical activity, 122, 124, 290
Expecting, 84–91, 94, 351n19
arousal nonconcordance and, 196, 204, 205, 207, 211, 218, 222
characteristics of, 85–86
context and, 87–88
desire and, 252
love/attachment and, 132
Explicit/erotic cues, 72
Explicit learning, 85–86
Feels, 119, 128, 179, 253–54, 319, 328
cultural impact on, 121
deﬁned, 116
stress and, 116, 121, 123, 145, 146
Fertility, 117
Fifty Shades of Grey (James), 58, 196, 207–8
Fight/ﬂight/freeze stress responses, 111, 114–17. See also Stress response cycle
Fiji, 183
Flatliners, 52, 89
Flock metaphor, 282–85, 287, 313
Flowers from the Storm (Kinsale), 136
Fluids, bodily, 30–32. See also Lubrication
Focus group research, 73–74
Fordyce, James, 159
Foreskin (prepuce), 22, 23
Fourchette, 23

[PDF page 356]

Four-phase model of sexual response, 44–45
Frenulum, 23
Freud, Sigmund, 275
Garden metaphor, 333
on anatomy, 38–39
on arousal nonconcordance, 220–22
on body self-criticism, 166
on context, 83, 94, 323
on cultural context, 154–55
on desire, 224–25, 255–57
on dual control model, 69
on expecting, eagerness, and enjoying systems, 90–91
on love, 148–49
on meta-emotions, 328
on trauma, 130–31
Genderqueer sexual functioning, 8
Genital fold, 19
Genitals. See also Anatomy; individual organs
metaphorization of, 17, 38, 60, 210, 276
size of, 15–16, 205–6
Genital swelling, 19
Genital tubercle, 19
Germer, Christopher, 182
Glamour (magazine), 161
Glans clitoris, 20–21, 22, 27
Glans penis, 19, 21, 22
Goals, changing, 324–25
Goldstein, Andrew, 320
Goldstein, Irwin, 320
Good Enough Sex (GES) model, 365n9
Gottman, John, 75, 80, 134, 142, 201, 239–42, 283, 310–11, 320
Graham, Cynthia, 73
Gravity, emotional center of, 142–43, 237
Grooming and self-care, 122–23
Groundhog Day (ﬁlm), 233–34
G-spot, 274
Haidt, Jonathan, 171
Haines, Staci, 128

[PDF page 357]

Half the Sky (Kristof and WuDunn), 232
Hallucinations (Sacks), 295
Harlow, Harry, 134–35
Healing
from body self-criticism, 166
choosing, 144
with nonjudging, 316–17
Healing Sex: A Mind-Body Approach to Healing Sexual Trauma (Haines), 127–28
Health at Every Size (HAES), 168, 169
Health at Every Size: The Surprising Truth about Your Weight (Bacon), 169
Heart rate, raising, 246
Hedwig and the Angry Inch (musical), 131
Heiman, Julia, 266
Henderson, Bobby, 211
Hess, Amanda, 206–7
Hitchens, Christopher, 132
Hite Report, The, 158, 362n12
Holstege, Gert, 282
Homologues, 21, 23, 26, 28, 30, 35, 274, 275, 277
deﬁned, 20
intersex, 32
Hormones
desire and, 16, 226, 238–39, 360n20
masculinizing, 18
“How Can I Keep from Singing?” (hymn), 292
How to Think More about Sex (de Botton), 209
Hymen, 27–29, 31, 277, 347n4
Ideal Marriage: Its Physiology and Technique (van de Velde), 157–58
Identity, connecting desire to, 248–49, 250–51
Iggy Pop study, 80–81, 84, 88, 117, 202, 237–38, 252, 326, 351n18
Imperforate hymens, 28
Implicit learning, 85–86
Incentive motivation system, 230–31, 232
Inner labia. See Labia minora
Insecure attachment style, 139–41
Integration, 283, 284
Intercourse, orgasm during. See Orgasm, through vaginal penetration
Intersex persons, 32, 347–48n7, 8
Isolation, 178

[PDF page 358]

Jane Eyre (Bronte), 134
Janssen, Erick, 4, 48
Jobs, Steve, 238
Johnson, Sue, 135, 137, 142, 319
Johnson, Virginia, 43, 46, 269, 361n2
Journaling, 122
Kabat-Zinn, Jon, 130
Kahneman, Daniel, 48
Kaplan, Helen Singer, 45–46, 230
Kegel muscle, 44
Kinsale, Laura, 136
Kinsey, Alfred, 361n2
Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender, and Reproduction, 4, 48, 332
Kringelbach, Morten, 84
Kristof, Nicholas, 232
Kung Fu Panda (ﬁlm), 334–35
Laan, Ellen, 194
Labia, 20, 23, 26
Labia majora (outer labia), 17, 19, 20, 26, 27, 44
Labia minora (inner labia), 19, 22, 26, 27, 44
Laboratory studies, 43–44
Lactation, 117
Laurie (composite), 7, 149, 283, 299
arousal nonconcordance and, 215–16
body self-criticism and, 153–54
context and, 76–77
cultural messages and, 186
desire and, 225, 242–43
dual control model and, 42–43, 68–69
meta-emotions and, 293–94, 299, 328–30
pressure to have sex and, 36–37, 272–73
stress and, 137–38
League of Their Own, A (ﬁlm), 196
Lesbian sex. See Merritt (composite)
Lie detector research, 206
Little monitor, 234–38, 240, 257
criterion velocity and (see Criterion velocity)
inﬂuencing, 236–38, 320–25

[PDF page 359]

jobs of, 234
meta-emotions and, 297, 298–300, 308, 320–25
orgasm and, 281, 285–86, 289
Lloyd, Elisabeth, 276–77, 278
Loneliness, 165
LoPiccolo, Joseph, 266
Love at Goon Park (Blum), 135
Love/attachment, 6, 94, 112, 113, 131–49
dark side of, 134–36
eagerness and, 86, 132, 133, 135, 137
managing, 141–44
origin of, 131–32
science of, 132–34
stress and, 144–49
styles of, 139–41
as the water of life, 146–49
Love/emotional bonding cues, 72
Love Sense: The Revolutionary New Science of Romantic Relationships (Johnson), 142, 319
Lubricants, 170, 218–20
Lubrication, 27, 28, 30–32, 44. See also Arousal nonconcordance
Maltz, Wendy, 128
Maps. See Sexual maps
Married Love (Stopes), 160
Masters, William, 43, 46, 269, 361n2
Masturbation, 15, 174–75, 274, 362–63n12
therapeutic, 339–41
Mating in Captivity (Perel), 240, 241
McBride, Kimberly, 73
McCall, Katie, 72–73
McCarthy, Barry, 365n9
Media literacy, 156, 183–84
Media Message, 156, 158, 184, 206, 304, 306
content of, 160–61
on orgasm, 288
sexual scripts and, 300
Medical Message, 156, 158, 184, 206
content of, 160
on orgasm, 288
sexual scripts and, 300

[PDF page 360]

Medieval anatomists, 16–17, 205
Meditation, 122, 285–86, 313
Men
anatomy of, 17, 18–20, 19, 21, 22
arousal concordance in, 193–94, 195, 196, 203–5, 222, 294
desire in, 225
dual control system of, 47, 60–61, 64–66
orgasm in, 2
sexual comparison with women, 2–3, 35
sexual entitlement in, 232
sexuality of as “default” standard, 203, 206, 229, 244, 275, 276, 297, 308
Men’s Sexuality Lite (women’s sexuality as), 2, 66, 276
Menstrual cycle, 31, 65, 117
Merritt (composite), 7, 149, 299
arousal nonconcordance and, 201–2
context and, 82–83
cultural messages and, 172–74
desire and, 225, 250–51
dual control model and, 63–64
meta-emotions and, 323–24
orgasm and, 265–66, 291–92
self-exploration by, 24–25
sexual assault of, 147–48
stress and, 111–12
Mesolimbic system, 83, 90, 132
Meta-emotions, 293–330
acceptance of status quo and, 326–28
emotion coaching and, 310–12
emotion dismissing and, 310–12, 318–20
the little monitor and, 297, 298–300, 308, 320–25
maps vs. terrain and, 297, 300–308
nonjudging and (see Nonjudging)
Metson, Cindy, 72–73
Metz, Michael, 365n9
Microperforate hymens, 28
Milhausen, Robin, 73, 155
Mindfulness, 268, 313
self-compassion and, 178
stress relief and, 122

[PDF page 361]

trauma relief and, 128, 129–31, 150, 317
Mindful Way through Depression, The (Williams et al.), 129–30
Miscarriage, 117
Mitchell, John Cameron, 131
Monkeys, studies involving, 134–35
Monogamy, 226, 238, 239–42
Mons pubis, 29
“Monster mother” studies, 134–35
Moral Foundations Theory, 171
Moral Message, 156, 184, 206, 305, 306
content of, 158–59
on orgasm, 288
sexual scripts and, 300
Myotonia, 44
Nagoski, Amelia, 133–34, 304–6
Neﬀ, Kristin, 178
New York Times, 194, 296
Nipples, 20, 28, 31, 44, 277
Nocturnal penile tumescence, 203
“No” messages, 155, 156
Nonconcordance. See Arousal nonconcordance
Nonjudging, 308–13, 315–17, 323
emotion coaching in, 310–12
healing trauma with, 316–17
tips for beginners, 312–13
Normality, 2–3, 5, 9–11, 34, 176, 307, 325–26
Nucleus accumbens (NAc), 80–81, 84, 350–51n14
Olivia (composite), 7, 118, 129, 148–49, 179, 299
anatomy-response (non)connection in, 15–16
arousal nonconcordance and, 197
context and, 89–90, 223–24
desire and, 223–24, 225, 256–57
dual control model and, 50–51
the little monitor and, 285–86
meta-emotions and, 302–3
sexual self-acceptance and, 39–40
stress and, 119–20, 180–81, 283
One Ring. See Emotional One Ring

[PDF page 362]

Oprah (television program), 46
Oral sex, 170–71
Orgasm, 6, 265–92, 322, 324
absence of (anorgasmia), 45, 280, 364n24
through clitoral stimulation, 272, 274, 275, 292, 322
deﬁned, 267
diﬀerent ways to have, 271–72
diﬃculty with, 279–81
dual control model and, 4
ecstatic, 282–92
as an evolutionary bonus, 276–78
extended, 343–45
in the four-phase model, 44
genetic factors in, 349n9
laboratory studies of, 43–44
meta-emotions and, 314–15
nonconcordance in, 269
practice and, 289–92
simultaneous, 160
in the triphasic model, 45
unrecognized, 281
through vaginal penetration, 2–3, 16, 272, 274–76, 292, 322
variation in, 266–67, 269–71
what it is not, 267, 269–70, 271
“Origin of Love, The” (song), 131
Outer labia. see Labia majora
Ovaries, 17, 20
Over-identiﬁcation, 178
Oxytocin, 135
Pain
context and, 80
during sex, 27, 40, 141, 238, 320–21
Paralanguage, 200
Parasympathetic nervous system, 48, 115
Patriarchy, 203, 275
Pavlovian responses, 65, 85, 196, 207
Penis, 17, 20, 275
anatomy of, 21, 22
circumcision of, 26

[PDF page 363]

size of, 205–6
Perel, Esther, 239–42
Peripheral nervous system, 197–99
Pfaus, Jim, 62
Pﬁzer, 46
Photoplethysmography, vaginal, 194, 212, 356n3
“Pink Viagra,” 46, 213, 239. See also Erectile dysfunction medication
Placebo eﬀect, 47, 197, 351n14
Plateau (sexual response phase), 44, 45
Plato, 131
Pleasure, 87, 137, 281, 287, 288, 291, 292, 302, 324. See also Eagerness; Enjoying
Pleasure centers of the brain, 84
Porges, Stephen, 116
Porn, 26, 31, 33, 34, 40, 176, 193–94, 301
Pregnancy-arousal myth, 210
Prepuce. See Foreskin
Pride and Prejudice (Austen), 136, 159
Primal screaming, 122, 124, 290
Project Unbreakable, 209
Prostate, 28, 274
Proximity seeking, 133, 136
PTSD, 121. See also Trauma
Pudendum, derivation of word, 16–17, 205
Pukall, Caroline, 320–21
Raising an Emotionally Intelligent Child (Gottman), 310–11
Rape. See Sexual assault/rape
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, 203
Rats, experiments involving, 62–63, 79, 80–81, 85, 86, 88, 117, 196, 202, 237–38, 252
Redliners, 52, 89
Resolution (sexual response phase), 44
Responsive desire, 3, 6, 227, 256, 294, 296, 297, 307
changing one’s attitude toward, 324–25
the chasing dynamic and, 245
gender diﬀerences in, 225
the little monitor and, 236
percentage of women experiencing, 225, 257
Restaurant analogy, 197–99, 204, 205, 207, 209, 221–22
Romance novels, 136, 161–62
Romantic/implicit cues, 72–73

[PDF page 364]

Romney, Mitt, 210
Rumi, 148
Sacks, Oliver, 295, 299
Safe haven, 133, 135
Same parts/diﬀerent organization, 5, 40, 154, 325
arousal nonconcordance and, 197–99
dual control model and, 64–66
female-male, 16, 18, 19
importance of concept, 34–37
intersex, 32
orgasm and, 271–72
Sanctity/degradation moral foundation, 171, 288
Sanders, Stephanie, 73
Science, 8, 40, 66
on cognitive dissonance, 182
desire maximization with, 245–55
of falling in love, 132–34
on media literacy, 183–84
on self-compassion, 177–80
Science of Trust, The (Gottman), 75, 240, 241
Scientiﬁc Guide to Successful Relationships (Nagoski), 142–43
Scrotal raphe, 19, 20
Scrotum, 17, 19, 20
Sealed-oﬀ sex, 137
Secure attachment style, 139–41
Secure base, 133–34
Seeger, Pete, 292
Segal, Zindel, 130
Self-assertion, 253
Self-compassion, 156, 177–80, 317
exercise to increase, 180
key elements of, 178
Self-Compassion: Stop Beating Yourself Up and Leave Insecurity Behind (Neﬀ), 178
Self Compassion Scale (SCS), 178
Self-criticism. See Body self-criticism
Self-esteem, 179
Self-indulgence, 179
Self-judgment, 178. See also Nonjudging
Self-kindness, 123, 165, 178, 290–91, 317

[PDF page 365]

Self-paced termination, 116
Self-protection, 253
Seminal colliculus, 28
Seminal ducts, 28
Seminal ﬂuid, 30
Sensation in context, 77–83, 94
Sensorimotor therapy, 129, 310
Separation distress, 136, 139, 283
Sermons to Young Women (Fordyce), 159
SES. See Sexual excitation system
Sex
as “dirty,” 170–72
forgoing to increase desire, 153–54, 252
stress and, 117–20
that advances the plot, 136–37, 150, 242, 247
the true story of, 2–5
Sex and the City (television program), 46
Sex drive myth, 6, 229–36, 257
consequences of believing, 231–33
feelings apparently validating, 233–36
true drives compared with, 229–31
Sex ﬂush, 44
Sexual accelerator, 4, 46–47, 48–51, 247, 283. See also Dual control model; Sexual excitation
system
in arousal process, 51–53
cultural context and, 244
expecting and, 86
gender diﬀerences in, 60–61, 294
mechanism of action, 48
stress and, 118, 147
Sexual assault/rape, 125, 126–27, 147–48. See also Trauma
Akin’s remarks on, 210, 357n20
arousal nonconcordance and, 204–5
estimated incidence of, 124
intact hymen following, 29
male sexual entitlement and, 232
orgasm during, 270
Project Unbreakable on, 209
Sexual Attitude Reassessment, 176

[PDF page 366]

Sexual brake, 4, 46–47, 48–51, 247, 283. See also Dual control model; Sexual inhibition system
arousal nonconcordance and, 212–13
in arousal process, 51–53
body self-criticism and, 165
context and, 79
cultural context and, 243, 244
disgust and, 172, 175
focus group ﬁndings on, 73–74
gender diﬀerences in, 60–61, 294
mechanism of action, 48
medicating away, 213–15
orgasm diﬃculty and, 280, 291
as predictor of sexual problems, 53
stress and, 118, 147
Sexual excitation system (SES), 63, 154. See also Dual control model; Sexual accelerator
changing, 66–69
explained, 48–49
gender diﬀerences in, 60–61
as a trait, 51–52, 67
Sexual Healing Journey, The: A Guide for Survivors of Sexual Abuse (Maltz), 128
Sexual inhibition system (SIS), 63, 154, 280. See also Dual control model; Sexual brake
changing, 66–69
explained, 49
gender diﬀerences in, 60–61
genetic factors in, 349n9
as a trait, 51–52, 67
two components of, 49, 349n9
Sexual maps, 297, 300–308
Sexual orientation, 349–50n13
Sexual scripts, 300, 303
Sexual Temperament Questionnaire, 54–58
Sexually appealing stimuli, 21, 195–96, 198–99, 207, 208, 222
Sexually relevant stimuli, 47, 67, 78–79
arousal nonconcordance and, 195–96, 198–99, 205, 207, 208, 211, 222
emotional One Ring and, 87
factors inﬂuencing, 61–63
gender diﬀerences in perception of, 64–66
Shaft of penis, 19, 21, 22, 26
Shame, 17, 31, 205

[PDF page 367]

Shower analogy, 71–72, 92, 93
Sideways approach to coping with trauma, 128, 129–31
Silicone lubricants, 220
Silver, Nan, 320
SIS. See Sexual inhibition system
Skene’s glands, 30–31
Skin conductance, 194, 199, 200
Slate.com, 206
Sleep, 122, 203
“Sleepy hedgehog” model of emotion management, 143–44, 237, 290, 291, 319
Slings & Arrows (television program), 245–46
Socks and orgasm, 282, 290
Solace sex, 135, 137, 141
Somatic Experiencing (SE), 129
Spectatoring, 265, 268
Spontaneous desire, 3, 227, 229, 231, 296, 297, 307
changing one’s attitude toward, 322, 324
the chasing dynamic and, 245
cultural context and, 243
gender diﬀerences in, 225
the little monitor and, 236
percentage of women experiencing, 225, 257
Stage approach to sex therapy, 253
Steinem, Gloria, 250
Stepmom (ﬁlm), 194
Stopes, Marie, 160
“Story of Us” (relationship narrative), 201
Strain gauge, 193
Stress, 6, 89–90, 94, 111–31, 137–38, 180–81, 283
body self-criticism and, 165
desire and, 237
disgust distinguished from, 172
dual control system and, 52, 60
eagerness and, 86
love/attachment and, 144–49
separating stressors from, 114, 123
sex and, 117–20
worksheet on coping strategies, 151–52
Stressors, 114, 120–21, 123

[PDF page 368]

Stress response cycle, 113, 250
completing, 112, 121–24, 145–46, 147, 149, 179, 290, 329
culture impact on, 120–21, 146
described, 114–17
Subtractive integration, 283, 284
Sympathetic nervous system, 48
Symposium (Plato), 131
Tai chi, 122
Teasdale, John, 130
“Tend and befriend” dynamic, 133, 144–46
Testes (testicles), 17, 20, 22
Testosterone, 15, 214
Testosterone-dependent desire, 16, 360n20
Therapeutic masturbation, 339–41
Therapy, 127, 128, 251–52
Thermostat metaphor, 229–30
This American Life (radio program), 135
Threats, potential, 47, 49, 52, 61–63, 69, 75, 79
Tickling, 77–78, 79, 270, 302
tl;dr lists, 7
anatomy, 40–41
arousal nonconcordance, 222
context, 94
cultural context, 187
desire, 257
dual control model, 69
emotional context, 149–50
meta-emotions, 330
orgasm, 292
Top-down approach to coping with trauma, 128
Trans* sexual functioning, 8
Trauma, 124–31, 150. See also Sexual assault/rape
arousal nonconcordance and, 214, 215
bottom-up approach to coping with, 128–29
experience and consequences of, 124–26
healing with nonjudging, 316–17
sideways approach to coping with, 128, 129–31
survivorship and, 127–31
top-down approach to coping with, 128

[PDF page 369]

Tremblay, Tom, 125
Triphasic model of sexual response, 45–46, 230
Trust in one’s body, 83, 111–12, 129
arousal nonconcordance and, 201–2, 207
learning, 172–74
Tuiten, Adriaan, 213
Tunnel metaphor, 123, 143, 308, 310, 311, 312, 319
Turning oﬀ the oﬀs, 48–51, 285, 287, 289, 290–92, 323
with science, 247–51
worksheet, 258–61
Turning on the ons, 48–51, 285, 287, 289, 323
University of Connecticut, 199
Urethra, 16, 21, 22, 28, 30, 274
Urethral groove, 19
Urethral opening, 22, 27
Urethral oriﬁce, 19
Urethral sponge, 274
Urination, 30
Urogenital sinus, 19
Vagal brake, 352n6
Vagina
deﬁned, 29
orgasm through penetration of, 2–3, 16, 272, 274–76, 292, 322
position of clitoris relative to, 21
during sex, 44
Vaginal containment, 253
Vaginal opening, 22, 27
Vaginal oriﬁce, 19
Vaginal photoplethysmography. See Photoplethysmography, vaginal
Vaginismus, 45, 321. See also Pain, during sex
Van de Velde, T. H., 157–58
Ventral pallidum, 84
Vestibule, 21
Viagra, 46, 213, 239. See also Erectile dysfunction medication
Vibrators, 59, 287, 288, 362n12
Violence. See Abusive relationships; Sexual assault/rape; Trauma
Virginity, 28, 159
Visual/proximity cues, 72

[PDF page 370]

Vulva, 21
anatomy of, 26–27, 27
deﬁned, 29
photographic depictions of, 32–34
visual exploration of, 37–38
Washington University, 43
“Water of Life, The” (Rumi), 148
Weight and health, 167–70, 187
Wetness. See Lubrication
What Do Women Want? Adventures in the Science of Female Desire (Bergner), 75, 134, 206–
7
What Makes Love Last? How to Build Trust and Avoid Betrayal (Gottman and Silver), 319–20
What’s this? behaviors, 80–81, 86, 88
What the hell is this? behaviors, 80–81, 86, 88, 252
When Sex Hurts: A Woman’s Guide to Banishing Sexual Pain (Pukall and Goldstein), 320
Williams, Mark, 130
Women’s Health (magazine), 161
“Women’s Sexuality” (author’s class), 23
Worksheets
context, 95–108
Sexual Temperament Questionnaire, 54–58
stress coping strategies, 151–52
turning oﬀ the oﬀs, 258–61
WuDunn, Sheryl, 232
XX (genetic females), 18
XY (genetic males), 18
Yoga, 122

[PDF page 371]

Simon & Schuster Paperbacks
A Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2015 by Emily Nagoski, Ph.D.
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form
whatsoever. For information address Simon & Schuster Paperbacks Subsidiary Rights
Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
First Simon & Schuster trade paperback edition March 2015
SIMON & SCHUSTER PAPERBACKS and colophon are registered trademarks of Simon &
Schuster, Inc.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster
Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more
information or to book an event contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-
3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.
Illustrated by Erika Moen
Interior design by Ruth Lee-Mui
Cover design by Gail Anderson and Joe Newton
Cover photograph by Isabella Selby
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication
Data Nagoski, Emily.
Come as you are : the surprising new science that will transform your sex life / Emily Nagoski,
Ph.D.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references.
1. Sex instruction for women. 2. Sexual health. 3. Women—Sexual behavior. 4. Women—Health
and hygiene. I. Title.
HQ46.N32 2015

[PDF page 372]

613.9'54—dc23
2014017773
ISBN 978-1-4767-6209-8
ISBN 978-1-4767-6211-1 (ebook)

[PDF page 373]

