

[PDF page 1]

7 
(LSS SSS SS SSSSS SSS SSSASSSSSASASS SSS SS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSS SSSA SSS SSS SSSA ASS SSS SS LSA SS SSS SSF SSSISSS 
SSLLSSLSLLSSALLLILLLSLILLSALILL SILL SIL LIL LL LLL LLLL SASS ILLS LLL ALLL LLLLLLLSLLSLLLLLLSSLLLLSSSLLSASLLLSSLLSSASLLLLLSSLL- 
fe j . : < SSS SS 


[PDF page 2]

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
In 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/herbloodisgoldce00000wen 


[PDF page 3]

HarYs.- de Retles 
Ida 


[PDF page 4]



[PDF page 5]

III ILI ILL LLL SIS LS SS SSSSSLSLSSSSSSSLSSSSLSLSLSSSLSSSLSLSLSL SLAPS SLL PS SSSS SILLS SSSI SSSI 
lA E R 
BLOOD 
iors) 
GOLD 
CELEBRATING THE 
POWER OF 
MENSTRUATION 
HarperSanFrancisco A Division of HarperCollinsPublishers 
SSSSSSSSSSASSSSSSS SSS SASS SSSSSSSSSSSSSSASSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS 4 


[PDF page 6]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD: Celebrating the Power of Menstruation. Copyright © 1993 by Lara Owen. All rights re- 
served. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permis- 
sion except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information address 
HarperCollins Publishers, 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022. 
Manufactured in the United Kingdom by HarperCollins Publishers Ltd. 
FIRST EDITION 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Owen, Lara. 
Her blood is gold : celebrating the power of menstruation / Lara Owen. — Ist ed. 
Pe) cms 
Includes bibliographical references (p. 183). 
ISBN 0-06-250641-2 
1. Menstruation—Social aspects. 2. Menstruation—Mythology. I. Title. 
GN484.38.093 1993 
305.4’2—de20 92-53908 
CIP 
93 94 95 96 97 ” HCMG 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
This edition is printed on acid-free paper that meets the American National Standards Institute Z39.48 
Standard. 


[PDF page 7]

The title, Her Blood Is Gold, comes from the creation myth of the 
Kogi Indians, the only known surviving and intact pre-Columbian 
society, who live in a secret part of the Sierra mountains of Colombia. 
The Kogi say that the world was created by the Great Mother while 
she was menstruating. “Her blood is gold; it remains in the earth; it 
is fertility.” 
The Kogi are a mysterious, mystical people who call themselves 
the “Elder Brothers” and shun contact with the “Younger Broth- 
ers” —the invaders from across the ocean. They consider themselves 
to be the guardians of the planet, and they constantly perform ritu- 
als for the balancing of the world from their mountain home in the 
Heart of the World. Their observations of the recent changes in the 
natural world around them trouble them deeply, and they warn that 
the planet faces imminent destruction due to environmental damage 
from mining and pollution and humans meddling with the balance of 
nature. 


[PDF page 8]

a 
7 i os 
Ay a 
> mh 
; 7 
ii 
. 
% oh ve vies sitive ail ne ‘ se 
‘- panksiitl Hemp. Sant ects, weries panties py 
ied ENS Aen ie peeee ‘aikis yohina | derelions cana - aaa hi ‘i 
: Salis w rail i8 doh one et ieee ial interne ai Sa digas nt is P 
. “a ‘vest art) ct vypbeieys D aay i Rc nit Renin indie ; 
eae ee mt 
- _ tle iin 4. io ea cel ¥ “be 7a) t Mos ime yititonies pat tea >! 
aicaiha Ppa: sikh ei 4 aE ths rhe bike os boi vs 
Peal eae acne ee rk as eae) iv spun . 
pat hat Be his a os ee baa, piel 4 an HW suey vat ae - : ae He Ha ac a lai i Hight ‘ by Pv ee fend %, tad ‘i 1 
: nel i SS es ite AE 1 i dé iy ‘a arb ty surtiet ‘ i i Wl, witty 4 4 a. 
Dents cas Veo Fre ie Pb “A say pein a ui arg" binant eat 
ape: ie Ay a ay Not moe ey ie pnidtineny di. at aig agit, ee iff 
‘ pockets ra 
+ be h : VJ if 4, j TNR ik - ay * Deine penta ci a wa lite 7 7 a 5 
me ere i I Wee a a 
i a , ae ate al @ 
| NWA ies aes ia) © Cash i Re aaa All “speak 
Fie : % rie a 
' : ie oe y 
i , 0% Te ¢ y ae 
; ta i 5 
1 


[PDF page 9]

CONTENTS 
Acknowledgments 
Introduction 
Part One: Beliefs and Attitudes 
1 A Bnif History of Bleeding 
2 Moon, Blood, Earth, and Snake 
2 Her Blood Is Gold 
Part Two: Reclaiming the Cycle 
= The Wounded Woman 
5 Working with Menstrual Symptoms 
6 The Sabbath of Women 
Part Three: Waking Up to the Power: 
The Stories of Three Women 
A The Scientist: Wendy Alter 
8 The Educator: Tamara Slayton 
9 The Priestess: Hallie Iglehart Austen 
Part Four: Rituals and Recommendations 
10 Rituals of the Moon-Time 
11 Bleeding with the World 
Notes 
Appendix 1: Questions to Encourage Menstrual Awareness 
Appendix 2: Menstrual Blood and HIV 
Resources 
Selected Bibliography 
daly, 
174 
L77 
179 
181 
183 


[PDF page 10]

2 
hers SS 
- = 
] = —_ 
oo “~ 
a ; Me ae: i —_ rm a wt 
‘ a i 
a , ee — 
® 
ry a se . 7 > ee i ay cory 
Pi tc - ater igsen ihe ag i 
© : en ~ Miaralevih anew euHie he =e! 
— ——— cusehift iy Wea mee » 
Te ane 
7 . > ik pe) Whitey Bap a 
= _ = : laste be atl Paw ; : ‘ } i al 
ae ch heeds Seopa Baath hy | wife | ie a < “veyed since af? hata tae ae 
7 — _ a 
= ‘e 
a ee ees ee ” An 
‘ —< ; 7 Rs’ - Ti i ; ate, nes? ap 7 oy, _ 
: av : ; ‘lene «3 
{ x . ‘ ‘2 ee pO, oy ri 7 eh. io) ie : 
5 iy } A : 
7 = if , : etalon vi : oy ee: “ae vias » Cole ae 


[PDF page 11]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many people have helped me in many ways through the conception 
and writing of this book, and my heartfelt thanks go to them all. 
Huge thanks to David Brown for his love, encouragement, and 
support, without which it is hard to imagine how I would have been 
able to write this book. 
A big thank you to Victoria Cresswell for being a great friend and 
coconspirator in deep change, and an inspiration to me of how to live 
in a woman’s body with loving awareness of its cycles. 
My thanks to my many teachers, including Swiftdeer—for giving 
me the initial teaching that menstruation is considered a time of 
power for women in the Native American tradition—and my teach- 
ers in process-oriented psychology, in particular Arny Mindell, Amy 
Mindell, Max Schupbach, and Nisha Zenoff. A special thanks to Max, 
who urged me on to finish the book just when I most needed a push. 
1X 


[PDF page 12]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks to the women I interviewed—especially Wendy Alter, 
Hallie Iglehart Austen, and Tamara Slayton—to all the people who 
responded to my initial article on menstruation and encouraged me to 
continue with this work, and to Howard Rheingold who published 
that article and gave me great encouragement and invaluable advice. 
Thanks to all the members of the WELL who shared with me their 
ideas and experiences concerning menstruation. 
Thanks to Hazel Van Wijnen for encouragement, to Karie 
Brown, Leba Wine, and Charlotte Pauli, who read and commented 
on the manuscript in its earliest incarnation, to Paul Giancarlo for giv- 
ing much-needed moral support during the completion stage, and to 
Andrew Murray for his editorial help. 
And last I would like to thank and pay homage to the long line 
of women I feel standing behind me, whose spirits urged me on in 
writing this book, and who gave me love, guidance, support, and ac- 
cess to a women’s wisdom that goes beyond the limitations of culture, 
place, and time. 


[PDF page 13]

INTRODUCTION 
The assumption that lies behind this book is that life is, on balance, a 
Good Thing, and that the processes of being female are likewise essen- 
tially a Good Thing. For the past few thousand years, certainly in 
Judeo-Christian culture (and in many others), being female has been 
seen as a Bad Thing. We have had a lineage of descent that honors the 
male over the female and a preference for giving birth to sons. Conse- 
quently that which is special to the female has tended to be denigrated, 
whereas that which pertains to the male has been prized and respected. 
Imagine how the world would be if men had periods and gave 
birth. The alchemy of producing blood every month would be rec- 
ognized as a sign of the fertility that would be every man’s pride and 
joy. Instead, what we have is a world in which menstruation is com- 
monly referred to as “the curse” and where women do everything 
they can to disguise the fact that they are bleeding, often to the detri- 
ment of their health and well-being. 


[PDF page 14]

INTRODUCTION 
This book is the story of my journey into the menstrual myster- 
ies, which I undertook unconsciously in the beginning, and later, as 
I began to realize what was happening to me, with more intent. It also 
includes the stories of several other women who, like me, tumbled 
down the rabbit hole into the center of the earth, and found that their 
blood was a key into the heart of the Goddess. 
Some years ago I began to understand the relationship between 
my thoughts and my physical health, and I realized that my sense of 
myself as a woman was warped and distressed by my thoughts, many 
of which were so automatic as to be unconscious. Even though I had 
been raised in a family that was relatively nonsexist and had had many 
educational opportunities, I lived in a society that, even today, gives 
women the sometimes subtle, sometimes overt, message that they are 
inferior. 
I began to have a fantasy of living at a time when there was not a 
thought in the collective that women were in any way lesser than 
men—a time when the processes of the female body were revered and 
respected. As I dreamed into this other reality, I realized that my 
whole body would be affected and that not a cell in my being would 
have been formed out of ideas of female inferiority. This was a radi- 
cal thought—imagine not having a trace, a smidgen, hiding anywhere 
in your cells or your thoughts, that would ever imply that there was 
anything to be ashamed of about being female. That’s what I want, I 
thought. I want to live like that. I want to really honor and discover 
the richness of my femininity, and I want to glory in it, revel in it. I 
want to dance with the mystery of my wondrous alchemical womb. 
As a result of this journey, which I am still, of course, on, I now 
have a very different experience of being a woman, of menstruating, 
of the moon and the earth, of my body, my psyche, and my spirit. On 
the way I have learned how to get in touch with the wounded 


[PDF page 15]

INTRODUCTION 
woman within, the wounds that we all carry from growing up in a pa- 
triarchal culture. I have learned some ways to heal those wounds, and 
to begin to access the enormous strength that has been obscured by 
our ignorance of the power and beauty of the monthly cycle. I have 
learned that if I take time out for myself when I am bleeding I can ac- 
cess a centeredness and a wisdom within that feel eternal. 
Recognizing the value and pleasure of my periods has been an 
opening for me into a deep appreciation of being a woman. The 
whole process of menstruating has shifted from being something that 
I found mildly disgusting and certainly inconvenient, to being an in- 
built time of assessment, clearing, and preparation. It has become a 
time when I process the last month and prepare for the one coming. 
I look forward to my period as a time when I am most likely to be able 
to seek creative solutions to difficulties in my life—provided I make 
the space for doing so. This process has been so transformative for me 
that I am excited by its potential for the healing of other women. 
The book is divided into four parts—the first, Beliefs and Atti- 
tudes, begins with an exploration of our current perspective on men- 
struation in the Euro-Western industrialized world, seen first from the 
personal angle of my own initiation (or rather lack of) into menstru- 
ation and fertility, and then from the collective angle of the develop- 
ment of patriarchal culture, the subsequent diminishment of female 
reality, and the role of industrialization in severing us from our cycles. 
Then I take a look at the eternal archetypes associated with menstru- 
ation throughout time and in cultures the world over, in particular the 
Moon and Blood, the Earth and Snakes. The next chapter discusses 
the behavior and attitudes of societies that have a positive view of 
menstruation, cultures that see women’s monthly blood as a form of 


[PDF page 16]

INTRODUCTION 
gold—a source of richness with the potential to nourish both physi- 
cal and spiritual life. 
Part 2, Reclaiming the Cycle, is about being a woman today and 
about how our health and well-being are damaged by our attitudes 
toward the menstrual cycle. I discuss ways to work creatively with 
menstrual symptoms so that we can heal ourselves and also discover 
what is useful in our premenstrual rages and our cramps and lethargy. 
I look at what it is about our lifestyles that so readily creates menstrual 
disharmony and how, by reclaiming the natural impulses of the cycle, 
we can gain not only physical health but also psychological awareness 
and spiritual insight. 
In part 3, Waking Up to the Power, three women tell their stories 
of awakening to the mystery and magic and healing of menstruation. 
Wendy Alter was a chemical engineer with NASA who changed her 
lifestyle after recovering from breast cancer and in the process discov- 
ered that her period was the strongest time for her to contact the 
depths of her nature—depths of feeling and insight that she had felt 
completely cut off from and that she recognized she had abandoned in 
her search for career success in a scientific world. Tamara Slayton has 
been teaching women about the value of getting in touch with our 
cycles for many years and now directs a growing nonprofit foundation 
that educates women of all ages about the “menstrual matrix.” She 
also manufactures cloth menstrual pads and other products for the 
“ecology of being female.” Hallie Iglehart Austen, author of Woman- 
spirit and The Heart of the Goddess, is a leading light of women’s spiri- 
tuality who works with earth-centered ritual to promote personal and 
planetary healing. All three women talk openly about their own rela- 
tionships with their bleeding and explain how, in different ways, mak- 
ing a strong connection with their cycles has empowered and healed 
them. 


[PDF page 17]

INTRODUCTION 
Part 4, Rituals and Recommendations, describes ways to peel 
away the surface layers of our conditioning and get down to our in- 
nate knowledge of the power and beauty of menstruation—knowl- 
edge that is in all of us and that is an intrinsic part of having a positive 
experience of being a woman. Chapter 10 describes rituals, medita- 
tions, and practices to help us honor our bleeding and gain deeper 
awareness of our own individual experiences. Chapter 11 discusses 
ways in which we can change our lifestyles to incorporate more at- 
tention to our cycles in the context of our relationships with men, 
women, children, and the workplace. The book ends with a vision of 
a world in which women are free to menstruate in the way they want 
and where the wisdom of women is once again seen as a valuable so- 
cial and political resource. 


[PDF page 18]

panne 
7 parece eh anTiN a ra tei ge ort prune SEs yap ne raring of BE nb 
piseans £ ie aaa adastsuasbahen tn ta 
oe nero hej Aevp ree Sage ‘ee 
mp aoe Le Ae ea, Ci aiiegee pea Bic Wad: ord wi 
- oS ee aft aie _h © tdes: SP te 2 © ae ernest 
a7 a let ares St 5s 7 ait tay aia ee i es 
a 7 ay ’ ; i i ; : ‘ 
= v re! is re ve q 3 Va eh i a tinal vine 
= . ——— Or " bi ie : . 
Dahl uo PEI Pmetie dy Sat SR Oe ee OMF Cnr acd “aa Tiitw iyy aor : 
Se he - Ze q Kos rt 
ee ane Sarre SP) eels a = ssid edie aa _ 
cy 7 : : F : _ sa zy 
7 j >... Ni ae”. iy - ae > : Gee, s , @9@ afl Po u 7 Aon ya es vi alé or) 7 a qt ty) <6 - Pe. fi 
, a rh r ae Pa ae i en iw WDjepr ee) ey 
: " ae - J : ren 
Sik Gectnie cas) TE Boyt title! eg (ebetst = 2 ei cha fie seats 
: dca 2S 65 2.6¢ Awe 4 sf iver’ dss : =e 
neey" I ; @ ‘me tem FO, AA " mean iene si 
: ’ are Cay Was Ot : i 2 = IAG ABS ea elo lr ( an hat 
as : ; ‘ ~ : EER nay ial Lvippe ge PP y 
7 eee i ie A o 7 init shiek” be 
a0 
i : a heed oo car in 4 a “dle 3 ' 
ma el 


[PDF page 19]

jase Fe & OTN 
BELIEFS AND 
ATTITUDES 


[PDF page 20]



[PDF page 21]

A BRIEF HISTORY 
OF BLEEDING 
THE PERSONAL STORY 
I used to think that my periods were a nuisance, a messy intrusion that 
increased laundry and caused a host of unpleasant symptoms including 
exhaustion and debilitating pain. Menstruation interfered with my sex 
life, with athletic activities, and with my energy level. It caused erratic 
mood swings, irritability, and destructive, unstoppable bitchiness. It 
cost money—in pads and tampons to mop up the blood, in ruined 
clothes, in time away from work. It was a mean and sneaky saboteur 
that always came at the most inconvenient times. 
Despite this catechism of woe I wasn’t entirely against it. When 
my period came there was always a part of me that was pleased. It 
meant I was healthy and fertile and that everything was working 
properly. There was a sense of pride about bleeding that I felt strongly 
with my first period, but, in the absence of any external support, the 
feeling of pleasure dwindled away. 


[PDF page 22]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
Growing Up 
I don’t remember when I first heard about menstruation, how I first 
found out that one day I would bleed and it would be a good thing, 
not an accident. It was mysterious and I wanted it to happen. It meant 
I would be almost grown up and another crucial step closer to making 
my own decisions, living my own life. I wanted very much to leave 
home and create a different atmosphere for myself—I didn’t know 
what it would be, I just had a feeling of space and excitement. It was 
confusing though, because there was also something dark about be- 
ginning to bleed. 
I remember my mother showing me the package of sanitary pads 
in the airing cupboard in the bathroom—they were for me, for when 
my bleeding started. There was a belt to hold the pad. I couldn’t 
imagine having that pad between my skinny legs. But I didn’t think 
about that. [t was all too much for me. At school my friends started 
to bleed before me—all except my best friend, Nina. We were the late 
developers. Very smart, very cute—but no breasts, no blood, no 
boyfriends. My mother and her friends offered sympathetic com- 
ments. “Don’t worry about it,” they said. “They say that the later you 
start, the sooner you finish—you’re lucky—it means you'll have fewer 
periods in the long run.” 
I didn’t understand why that made me lucky. Or why they 
thought that having periods was a bad thing. I hated their knowing 
looks, their world-weariness. What did they know? I wanted to grow 
up, and I wanted it now. 
My First Period 
My first period came in August—a month after my fourteenth birth- 
day. I had a bath one evening and I looked down and there was a thin 
10 


[PDF page 23]

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BLEEDING 
trickle of red on the inside of my thigh. I went downstairs. My 
mother was in the hall. Still on the stairs, holding the stair-rail, clutch- 
ing the towel around me, feeling a hole where my stomach used to 
be, I said, “There’s some blood on my leg.” My mother said, “It must 
be your period. Oh dear, I used those pads myself last month when I 
ran out.” She held out her hands in apology, “I’d kept them for so 
long.” It was a Sunday. The shops were closed. I don’t remember 
what happened; we must have found a pad somewhere. She was very 
kind but somehow I felt like a nuisance. I felt empty. Then I felt very 
excited. I felt special. No one said very much. I carried on bleeding. 
I felt empty again. 
When school started again I told my friend Nina. “I had my pe- 
riod,” I said, trying to sound casual. She looked at me angrily, “I sup- 
pose you think that makes you something special,” she hissed. I 
stepped back, shocked. Well, yes, it did, but I didn’t want to upset her. 
The fragile little balloon that was my pride in my womanhood de- 
flated even more. I was just having a period. It was nothing special. 
Who did I think I was anyway? 
A Jewish friend of mine told me that when she had her first pe- 
riod her mother slapped her on the face. Reeling with shock, she 
asked, “Why did you do that?” Her mother replied, “I don’t know; 
it was done to me by my mother. It’s tradition.” Another friend said 
that she had been told by her grandmother that this traditional slap- 
ping was done so that the girl would always remember this important 
moment in her life. ““They could have thrown a party for her instead,” 
I said, “if what they really wanted was for her to have a memory.” 
To be hit on the face when first you become a woman—what an 
interesting statement about how womanliness is regarded. Perhaps it 1s 
intended to remove the feeling of pride that comes with the first blood. 
Something else took away that feeling of pride for me, and I think 
it was the absence of ceremony. It felt to me, internally, that something 
11 


[PDF page 24]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
truly amazing and magical was happening, and yet everyone around 
me treated it as a commonplace. I felt a sense of achievement mingled 
with excitement, curiosity, and embarrassment; I also remember a 
vague awareness of a vast and gaping unknown future. Intuitively I 
knew it was a massive landmark in my life—and yet no one said or did 
anything about it, other than to give me some sanitary pads. I know 
my mother was pleased—after all, it meant I was healthy and growing 
up normally—but I needed more than that. I needed a ceremony, a 
party, some joyful public recognition of this huge event in my devel- 
opment. But nothing happened. As the months went by, I felt more 
and more the shame and embarrassment and less and less the excite- 
ment and the pride that had glimmered for a moment with the first 
blood. 
Becoming a Woman 
When I had my period I often felt fuzzy and found it hard to con- 
centrate on my schoolwork. When I had important exams coming up, 
my mother and I went to see the doctor, and he gave me pills to stave 
off my period until after the exams. It worked great, and I passed all 
my exams. But my periods became strangely irregular, and I remem- 
ber several months of very heavy bleeding every two weeks. I have a 
dim memory of lying in bed and feeling all this blood pouring out of 
me. Just as we were going to go back to the doctor, they calmed 
down, and I went back to being regular again. I don’t think that either 
my mother or I ever considered that the pills I had taken might have 
upset my cycle. This was in the days when medicinal drugs were a 
completely Good Thing, when we were grateful of their miracles and 
ignorant of their insidious side-effects. Then I started to have really 
bad pains with my bleeding—so more drugs were prescribed for the 
pain, not just painkillers but new hormonal drugs. I entered a vicious 
{2 


[PDF page 25]

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BLEEDING 
circle of using haphazard doses of hormones to control my already 
confused hormones, which in turn led to more cramps and more 
bleeding. 
“It'll settle down when you get older—” they said, “when you 
get married, and have children.” This was little consolation to a six- 
teen-year-old. 
It was miserable. Becoming a woman seemed to be an unmiti- 
gated drag. I wanted to travel; at sixteen Nina and I hitchhiked round 
the south of England, and at seventeen we caught trains to Paris, to 
the south of France, to Italy. Everywhere we went we were harassed 
by men—on trains, on buses, on the street. It was awful. I hated it. It 
was totally impersonal and vaguely disgusting. I was still a virgin, and 
I felt confused and abused by the way men leered at us, tried to feel us 
up on the bus in Florence, tried to persuade us to come back to their 
place instead of to the Youth Hostel. 
I wanted to be a boy really badly. My friends who were boys 
could hitchhike alone, could travel alone, without having to develop 
a steely look and fast reflexes like I did. When I was eighteen, I went 
to live in Paris. After several months of navigating the Metro alone, I 
caught a glimpse of my pursed face in the window of the speeding 
train and realized that I was becoming ugly in my effort to keep all 
these men away from me. Who were they? Have men always plagued 
young women in this way? This was during the early seventies, in that 
brief moment during the era of free love just before the rise of femi- 
nism, when sexist behavior was still overt and widespread. I couldn’t 
talk back—I didn’t know how to tell men to get lost in the confident 
way I see teenagers do today. I was vulnerable and struggling to have 
my adventures in a male world. 
So periods were just one more inconvenient part of being female. 
All I knew about menstruation was that it was a mark of being a 
woman and meant that I could (horror of horrors) get pregnant. At 
13 


[PDF page 26]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
school, it was not a subject to be mentioned other than in the biology 
class. All the information I received was purely physical, apart from oc- 
casional crude jokes. You had a period because you weren’t pregnant, 
and the menstrual flow was simply the discarded lining of the womb 
provided for a possible fetus. My friends and I discussed it and, in the 
absence of further information, decided that the female body was 
poorly evolved—all that blood and fuss for years and years when you 
needed only to do it once or twice in order to have children. 
And then there was that lurking uncomfortable shame that was 
somehow mixed up with the whole experience. At home, my period 
was something to be kept secret from my father and brothers. If I had 
to mention it, I would use a hushed voice and talk to my mother 
when we were alone. Shortly after my periods had begun we were 
going on a family trip, and I had to ask my father to stop the car so 
that I could go to the pharmacy. Of course, he wanted to know what 
it was that I needed to buy. I remember this awful feeling as I told him 
I had to buy some sanitary pads. It was a peculiar mixture of shame, 
pride, and total embarrassment. He was very nice about it and, as far 
as I can remember, never said anything to make me feel that there was 
anything to be ashamed of—but somehow there was always this 
shame in the background of my thoughts, and it colored my whole 
relationship with the outside world. 
The picture society gave me through advertising was a confusing 
one. Tampon ads showed lithe girls in bikinis running gleefully to- 
ward the ocean and girls in tight white jeans jumping onto horses. 
This didn’t mesh very easily with my experience of lethargy and 
cramps. And I knew that no one in their right mind would trust a 
tampon so much that they would go out for the day in white jeans. 
Pah! It must have been men writing those ads. 
Yet somehow I felt that I should be like the girls in the Tampax ads 
and that the way my body and mind behaved was somehow wrong— 
14 


[PDF page 27]

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BLEEDING 
that a normal girl wouldn’t feel any different when she had her period. 
There’s nothing she’d like more than to scramble onto a horse and 
gallop off for an adventure while that nice little tampon allowed her 
to forget that she was menstruating at all. The embarrassing reality was 
that I couldn’t even get a tampon inside me. Not only was I not fit- 
ting the stereotype, I was also failing with the equipment. I felt de- 
cidedly inadequate until I eventually succeeded. Then the process of 
imagining I wasn’t having a period at all began in earnest. 
Tampons and the pill liberated me to a certain extent from the 
worst of menstruation. When I was eighteen I went on the pill, and 
taking it meant that my periods were very light and completely pre- 
dictable. If there was some reason why I didn’t want to have my pe- 
riod, I could mess about with my cycle by taking the pill straight 
through. My friends used to do this, and it was recommended for ath- 
letes and women whose career performance might be adversely af- 
fected by menstruation. I shudder now to think of the casual way we 
manipulated our bodies to fit our will. 
Tampons meant that I never had to really look at my blood. I just 
stuffed the thing in, it took care of the mess, and then when I took it 
out I could sling it down the toilet without having to even look at it. 
My natural curiosity usually interfered with this procedure—but the 
possibility was there for pretty much ignoring that you were having 
a period at all. I could do anything with a tampon in—go swimming, 
wear a skimpy bikini or tight jeans. I was always sexually active. My 
period didn’t slow me down—no sirree—I wasn’t going to let some- 
thing like that get in the way of my pleasure. The great thing about 
tampons was that they soaked up the blood that was coming out so 
that if you timed it right and whipped out the tampon immediately 
before intercourse, there was hardly any blood to be seen. Of course, 
being on the pill helped with that too, because there wasn’t very 
much blood in the first place. 
15 


[PDF page 28]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
These attitudes—that periods were essentially a nuisance and that 
they should be ignored as much as possible—pervaded my thinking 
about my body and my femaleness. Even when I became interested in 
holistic medicine it was a while before I began to change my behav- 
ior when I was menstruating. I understood that I was growing up into 
a world where, for the first time in modern history, women could 
take on men in the outside world and be liberated from the drudgery 
of the kitchen sink and child care, and so I felt that I should make use 
of all the wonderful advances in medicine and hygiene that made it 
possible for me to pretend that, biologically, I wasn’t really a woman 
after all. I owned my sexuality at last but at an enormous cost. 
My journey out of this conditioning took over ten years. I think 
it will probably be a lifetime task to work through and out of the myr- 
iad of insidious negative ideas about femaleness, and at every new 
stage of my life I will encounter old tapes of denial and distrust in the 
essential nature of female experience. That is what living at this point 
in history is about, for me, and for many women. 
PoE COLLECTIVE; S1 Oh 
So how has it happened that we think so little of the physiological 
processes of women’s bodies? And that we think that the best way to 
relate to monthly bleeding is to ignore it as much as possible, to walk 
around with cramping bellies and miserable minds, as though that 
were the lot of woman, and best to grin and bear it. This attitude is 
rooted in the denial of female reality that runs through the core of the 
history of the past few thousand years. 
The world wasn’t always dominated by patriarchal attitudes. Re- 
cent archaeological findings tell us that there was a time when women 
16 


[PDF page 29]

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BLEEDING 
and men worshiped the Great Goddess, the Earth Mother, and when 
images of the creative and fecund female were carved into stone and 
treasured.! ‘As far as we can tell, about 5,000 years ago, militaristic 
groups from the Middle East began invading the peaceful, agrarian, 
Goddess-worshiping societies, beginning a long-term swing on the 
pendulum of human history. As the pendulum swung away from the 
Goddess and toward male-oriented values, so the position of women 
in society became progressively worse, and aspects of life relating to 
the female were denigrated. 
Over time this led to an association of shame with the body (as- 
sociated with the female, the Goddess, the earth, feelings, and sensa- 
tions) relative to the mind (associated with the male, the God, the sky, 
the world of ideas). Over the past few thousand years, all the main- 
stream religions in the world have become patriarchal (to varying de- 
grees), and all of them value the intellect and the spirit over the body 
and the instincts. 
Shame about the body and shame about being female—it pretty 
quickly adds up to shame about menstruation. There is a shame that 
women carry simply for being women. The shame of women was 
bigger than the shame of men right from the first book of the Old 
Testament (a guidebook for life written by men and translated and in- 
terpreted by subsequent men). In fact, in the mythic version of history 
presented by the tale of Adam and Eve, male shame wouldn’t even 
exist if it weren’t for women. (And we do well to take these tales se- 
riously—for although they may not have a basis in fact, they are the 
cornerstones of our belief systems.) 
The Book of Genesis tells us how the snake told Eve that the rea- 
son God had forbidden them to eat from the tree in the middle of the 
garden was not, as God had told them, because if they did they would 
die, but rather to prevent them from becoming Gods themselves. 
7 


[PDF page 30]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
“Of course you will not die,” said the serpent, “for God knows 
that, as soon as you eat it, your eyes will be opened and you will be 
like God himself, knowing both good and evil.” 
And Eve seeing that the fruit was “desirable for the knowledge it could 
give,” picked some and ate it and then gave some to her husband, and 
he ate it too (Gen. 3:4—-6). 
In the middle ages society became increasingly patriarchal. In 
order to give religious support to the establishment of the patriarchy, 
there was some subtle—and some not-so-subtle—re-creation of the 
old myths. Women were cast as the corrupters, the Jezebels, to be 
feared and denied by the servants of a very male God. The story of 
Adam and Eve was distorted so that knowledge of good and evil was 
taken to mean knowledge of sex. Eve had, through her wicked se- 
ductive powers, tricked innocent Adam into falling from grace, and 
not because, as you remember, she wanted knowledge. Oh no, it now 
became abundantly clear that what Eve had been after was sex. The 
harlot! The problems of humankind became, even more clearly, all 
Eve’s fault. The curse that God inflicts on Eve—“I shall give you great 
labor in childbearing; with labor you will bear children. You will de- 
sire your husband, but he will be your master” (Gen. 3:16)—was ex- 
tended to include menstruation, which became the monthly “curse” 
through which Eve paid for her sins.” 
I was educated in a Church of England school in the early sixties, 
and I remember being taught that Eve was the corrupter of Adam— 
she was the temptress and the one that made the decision to eat the 
apple. And although sex wasn’t mentioned explicitly, all the pictures 
in the books showed Adam and Eve naked, with Eve looking seduc- 
tive and sly while Adam was cast as a hapless man who was putty in a 
woman’s hands. That highly potent image was one of the first images 
of woman that I was shown, and it was used to illustrate the creation 
myth that lies at the basis of our cultural identity. Small wonder that 
18 


[PDF page 31]

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BLEEDING 
it has taken much unraveling to discover the layer upon layer of dis- 
trust and ignorance of the processes inherent in being a woman. Or 
that we have had our own bodily experiences so distorted that we 
have come to believe the distortion rather than to believe our own 
experiences. 
The rise in power of the patriarchal religions did not happen 
overnight. Pagan earth-centered religious practices, based on ancient 
wisdom, continued to thrive, especially in Northern Europe, well 
into the middle ages. Then Christianity took off in a big way, aided by 
social and economic changes and the terrors of long-term wars and 
the Black Plague. The Inquisition brought about a period of unbe- 
lievable violence against heretics and an estimated nine million so- 
called witches were killed with great brutality. Eighty-five percent of 
them were women. With them died the remains of the Goddess re- 
ligion and much of humankind’s knowledge of midwifery, herbalism, 
agriculture, and spiritual practice based on natural laws. 
After the takeover of European religious life by Christianity, the 
next big change to affect the lives of women was the Industrial Rev- 
olution. In nineteenth-century industrial Britain and North America, 
women were divided into two cultural stereotypes: the stoical 
breeder-worker and the feeble little woman. One slaved away in the 
mills and factories, while the other languished on a sofa clutching a 
phial of smelling salts to her soft and tender bosom. 
For the working woman, menstruation was a nuisance that cut 
down on her productivity. If she was earning wages by the hour or by 
the piece, then resting or relaxing in any way during her period was a 
luxury she could not afford. The poor have always had to work whether 
or not they have felt like it. However, in pre-industrial rural life, work- 
load was related to seasonal flux. At harvest time everyone worked like 
the dickens; in midwinter there was virtual hibernation while the land 
lay under frost and snow. In a matter of decades, workers in Europe and 
19 


[PDF page 32]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
America shifted from living in a culture that responded to the rhythm of 
the moon and the sun to one in which work was determined by the 
clock and by machines. 
This had a particular effect on women, who had been used to 
greater autonomy in the shaping of their work day. If you are in 
charge of your own working environment—your home or small 
farm, for example—you can tailor your work to suit shifts in energy 
and disposition. This ability to adapt workload to inner rhythm dis- 
appeared with the industrial revolution, which tied workers to a con- 
cept of productivity based on the operation of machines. Unlike 
human beings, machines are not subject to seasonal and monthly fluc- 
tuations. The ideology of the industrial age adapted human reality to 
that of machines, rather than making machines fit the needs of hu- 
mans. 
For women who did not have to work outside the home, this was 
not immediately felt, although it soon came home in the form of ex- 
hausted husbands and sons. But the majority of working-class women 
did have to go out to work, and for many of them the demands of 
their jobs were extreme. 
For middle-class women a very different lifestyle developed. Per- 
haps in unconscious compensation for the suddenness of the shift into 
machine-time as well as because idleness still represented status, mid- 
dle-class women were characterized in medical and popular literature 
as feeble creatures, prone to TB and neurasthenia and in need of pro- 
tection from the outside world and from the excessive stimulation that 
might be caused by reading novels or riding horses. They were en- 
couraged to rest during menstruation. A medical book of the time ad- 
vised: ““We cannot too emphatically urge the importance of regarding 
these monthly returns as periods of ill-health, as days when the ordi- 
nary occupations are to be suspended or modified.’ 
20 


[PDF page 33]

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BLEEDING 
The correct behavior and treatment of middle-class women dur- 
ing menstruation was the opposite of that considered acceptable for 
working women, who were expected to continue working regardless 
of the time of the month. Class distinctions were used by the medical 
profession to support this difference in treatment. While middle- and 
upper-class women were seen as sensitive and weak, working-class 
women were seen as insensitive and tough, with a tendency to laziness 
that justified their being whipped (sometimes literally) into produc- 
tivity. 
This phenomenon was most exaggerated in the southern United 
States, with the vast difference in lifestyle between the black slaves and 
the white wives and daughters of slave owners. It was easier to have 
two medical models in this instance, for the difference in race was 
used to support theories about the needs and appropriate behavior of 
the two types. 
Nineteenth-century medical concepts of the nature of the female 
body and temperament laid much stress on the weakness and volatil- 
ity of emotion created by hormonal shifts, and to the nineteenth-cen- 
tury physician, the womb and ovaries were the most important organs 
in a woman’s body. 
In 1849 Dr. Frederick Hollick wrote: ‘““The Uterus, it must be re- 
membered, is the controlling organ in the female body, being the 
most excitable of all, and so intimately connected, by the ramifications 
of its numerous nerves, with every other part.””4 
And in 1870 Dr. W. W. Bliss waxed lyrical on the wonders of the 
ovaries: “Accepting then, these views of the gigantic power and in- 
fluence of the ovaries over the whole animal economy of woman, that 
they are the most powerful agents in all the commotions of her sys- 
tem; that on them rest her intellectual standing in society, her physical 
perfection, and all that lends beauty to those fine and delicate contours 
Z 


[PDF page 34]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
which are constant objects of admiration, all that is great, noble and 
beautiful, all that is voluptuous, tender and endearing; that her fidelity, 
her devotedness, her perpetual vigilance, forecast, and all those qual- 
ities of mind and disposition which inspire respect and love and fit her 
as the safest counsellor and friend of man, spring from the ovaries.”° 
As more and more women have gone out to work and as our so- 
ciety has developed in terms of sexual equality, the stereotype of the 
frail and dependent middle-class woman has faded. It still exists, but as 
the butt of derision rather than as a sign of wealth and status. We place 
a far higher value on productivity than on leisure, and it is no longer 
satisfying or economic for women to stay at home. 
Modern feminism initially rejected ideas of hormonal influence 
on women. It is not surprising that feminists reacted against the idea 
that women are different during menstruation, as such ideas had 
played a large part in chaining middle-class Victorian women to their 
sofas. If women were deemed unreliable because of the changes in 
their hormones throughout the month, then this supposed unreliabil- 
ity was used as a reason to keep them from positions of power. 
But our need to gain equality with men in the working world 
may have led us to throw some good ideas out with the bad. There 
is usually at least a glimmer of truth in any ideology, and the physi- 
cians of the Victorian era were not completely wrong when they em- 
phasized the importance of menstruation in women’s overall health, 
the relationship between the womb and the psyche, and the wisdom 
of rest during the period. 
We have tended to reject all of this because it reminds us of the 
time when the lives of women were more controlled by men and be- 
cause it smacks of old arguments that kept women tied to the home 
and powerless in the outside world. We have also, quite rightly, re- 
jected the idea that the natural processes of being female are a sickness. 
But to say that something is not a sickness is not necessarily the same 
Be 


[PDF page 35]

A BRIEF HISTORY OF BLEEDING 
thing as ignoring it altogether. By ignoring menstruation in reaction 
to the ideas of the Victorian era, we have perhaps lost touch entirely 
with a lingering thread of awareness of its value in women’s lives. 
The changes that have taken place in the lives of women over the 
past thirty years may look like a revolution, but in many ways what 
has taken place has been an assimilation. Women seeking power in a 
male world have tended to do so by becoming pseudo-men. And, 
perhaps unwittingly, feminism has played a part in the suppression of 
menstruation. Germaine Greer in The Female Eunuch, her stirring 
tirade against the patriarchy, makes some important points about the 
taboos surrounding menstruation and how they reflect society’s den- 
igration of the female. But her conclusion is that menstruation is 
something that “we would rather do without” and that “no woman 
would menstruate if she did not have to.”© This was very much the 
party line of feminism in the sixties and seventies, and it was not until 
the rise of the women’s spirituality movement that menstruation 
began to be seen as something sacred and meaningful.’ 
In mainstream culture though, it is this idea of menstruation as in- 
convenience that has stuck, as women have increasingly adapted to 
work schedules formed by men and to a working atmosphere that de- 
veloped within the context of a patriarchal society. When I discuss an- 
cient ideas about the spiritual power of menstruation with successful 
and aspiring women, one of the biggest fears I have come across is that 
this will in some way affect their myth of being “just as good as a man, 
and sometimes better.”” Many women don’t want to go deeper into 
menstruation; they are scared of what they will discover. It suits them 
better to suppress their feelings with tranquilizers, to spray with vagi- 
nal deodorants to disguise the smell of blood, to numb their pain 
through painkillers, and to absorb their blood with tampons so they 
never have to actually see it. It’s easier to be a successful woman in a 
man’s world if you hardly recognize that you menstruate at all. 
23 


[PDF page 36]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
The technology of suppression—tampons, vaginal deodorants, 
sophisticated pain-killing and mood-altering drugs—has acted to- 
gether with the myth of the superwoman to create a predominant cul- 
tural attitude that a menstruating woman is no different from one who 
is not bleeding. The trouble with all this is that it simply isn’t true. 
Any woman remotely in touch with her body knows that when she is 
menstruating, and usually for a few days before, she feels different. 
And this is a fact of nature that ultimately cannot be denied. 
24 


[PDF page 37]

vA 
MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, 
AND SNAKE 
Behind our culturally and historically determined attitudes and beliefs 
about menstruation lies a web of symbols and myths that is a more 
permanent part of the matrix of human experience. The knowledge 
of these symbols lies deep within our bones, a legacy passed down in 
our genes from all the mothers who gave birth to us and our forebears 
over millions of menstruating years. 
No matter how we attempt to consign them to the shadow, the 
archetypes of the Moon, Blood, Earth, and Snake continue to pervade 
our unconscious life with their numinosity. They are all associated 
with the Goddess, and, like Her in Her most awesome and powerful 
expression, have held predominately negative connotations in recent 
history, particularly in the more patriarchal societies. These negative 
connotations are so powerful that it can be a stretch for us to even 
imagine that they are not fact but are merely a view of reality—and 
not the only reality there is. 
Phe 


[PDF page 38]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
The Moon has been associated with lunacy and cyclical violence 
as much as with inspiration; its cycles have been seen to suggest in- 
consistency and unreliability rather than fluidity and the ability to ex- 
perience a wide range of emotions. 
Blood is seen as gore; people faint at the sight of it; we hide it on 
tampons and throw it down the toilet; we associate it with injury and 
death. Yet, in older times (and still in the Tantric tradition) menstrual 
blood was viewed as a sacrament symbolizing the wonder of life—this 
most ancient of sacraments is probably the origin of the Christian 
sacrament of the Blood of Christ. 
The Earth and nature have been seen as enemies—the Earth as a 
resource to be exploited and nature as a force to be tamed and gov- 
erned. The collective failure to understand that the Earth is a mother 
to be revered and respected has resulted in the current ecological dis- 
aster that threatens all life on the planet. 
The Snake has been granted the most evil place of all as the 
bringer of sin, the cause of the fall from grace from the Garden of 
Eden. It once held power as the great symbol of death and rebirth, the 
magical one who brought knowledge of sexuality, of life and death, 
whose bite sent priestesses into visionary states and whose appearance 
presaged mystical and powerful events. 
By exploring these symbols, their unconscious effects upon us, 
and their more ancient meanings, we can begin to peel off the layers 
of cultural conditioning that keep us from an intimate, positive rela- 
tionship with femaleness. We can look at menstruation as if for the 
first time, with a spirit of inquiry and wonder. We can begin to ex- 
perience the reverence that this magical flow of rich and fertile blood 
inspired in our ancestors. As Elinor Gadon tells us in The Once and Fu- 
ture Goddess: 
26 


[PDF page 39]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
The word ritual comes from rtu, Sanskrit for menses. The 
earliest rituals were connected to the women’s monthly 
bleeding. The blood from the womb that nourished the un- 
born child was believed to have mana, magical power. 
Women’s periodic bleeding was a cosmic event, like the cy- 
cles of the moon and the waxing and waning of the tides. We 
have forgotten that women were the conduit to the sacred 
mystery of life and death.! 
THE MOON 
I’ve always been fascinated by the moon. I remember as a teenager 
walking home late one wet night and standing in the light of the full 
moon and gazing up at her. I became aware of a power that I couldn’t 
name, and I| spontaneously welcomed the full moon and out of some 
instinct thanked her. I didn’t know then what I was thanking her for, 
but I did it anyway. A vestigial knowledge of her effect on the 
rhythms of life must have lingered within me. 
As a young adult I lived in the countryside in England. I used to 
work in a village pub three miles from my home, and the only way I 
could get there was on my grandmother’s old bicycle. I would cycle 
back late at night, the dynamo noisily clicking, fairly terrified by one 
particularly dark and lonely stretch of tree-lined road. If the moon was 
full, I was comforted by her light. It mattered to me if she was full or 
not; it actually affected my experience of life. 
Before the advent of electric light, the full moon lighting up the 
night sky meant a time when one could walk easily at night, visit 
friends, hold social events, perform outdoor ceremonies, and observe 
ae, 


[PDF page 40]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
wildlife for the hunt. The new moon, when the night is darkest, was 
a time of more introversion, a time to go inside oneself; in many tra- 
ditions the new moon was a time of purification. 
Many cultures have venerated the moon. Plutarch tells us that the 
priests of Ancient Egypt called the moon the Mother of the Universe, 
because the moon “having the light which makes moist and pregnant, 
is promotive of the generation of human beings and the fructification 
of plants.”? 
With the industrial age, many associations with the moon died 
out of everyday life. But we only have to go back one or two hundred 
years to find evidence of the crucial relationship between the cycles of 
the moon and successful farming. In the British Isles it was believed 
that the wise farmer should “kill fat swine for bacon about the full 
moon. Sheer sheep at the moon’s increase: fell hand timber from the 
full to the change; horses and mares must be put together in the in- 
crease of the moon, for foals got in the wane are not accounted strong 
. . . fruit should be gathered, and cattle gelded, in the wane of the 
moon.”? 
Many cultures have understood the relationship of the cycles of 
the moon to the growth of plants, and this knowledge still survives. 
The teachings of Rudolph Steiner are used by many gardeners in Eu- 
rope as a guide to the relationship between horticulture and lunar 
phases, and in India it is still common practice in some areas to plant 
by the moon.4 
The importance of the moon to the ancients lives on in a vari- 
ety of traditions. Modern birthday cakes descend from the Greek 
custom of honoring the monthly birthday of Artemis the Moon with 
lighted full moon cakes. In Gaul the crescent moon was an important 
symbol and the people made their communion cakes in a crescent 
shape. Modern France still makes these cakes and calls them croissants 
28 


[PDF page 41]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
(crescents), colloquially known as moon-teeth.° In pre-Islamic Ara- 
bia the Moon Goddess was so important that her emblem came to 
represent the entire country and remains as the lunar crescent on Is- 
lamic flags. Today, the Arab equivalent of the Red Cross is called the 
Red Crescent. 
The root word for both moon and mind was the Indo-European 
word manas, mana, or men, said to mean mind, and an attribute of Ma, 
the primordial mother. Mana from heaven was divine “food,” spiri- 
tual blessing that flooded the body and nourished not only the soul 
but also the physical being. Mana was also related to the Latin mens, 
meaning both mind and moon as well as a mysterious quality of spir- 
itual power—nu-men. In Greek, menos meant both moon and power. 
Men, meaning month in Greek, is the root word for both measure- 
ment and menstruation. 
The moon is associated with strong emotions—we talk of being 
moonstruck, of falling in love under the spell of the full moon. I’ve al- 
ways found that I am deeply affected by the full moon and am much 
more likely to have extreme moods, from elation to melancholy. The 
word lunacy derives from lunar, and many cultures believe that the 
moon itself creates madness in susceptible people, such is the strength 
of the emotion that it generates. The full moon triggers the were- 
wolf’s transformation, and the Moon card in the Tarot deck shows 
dogs howling under the moon. 
In the traditional Tarot deck the Moon is linked with danger and 
terror, whereas the Sun represents all that is good and bright and safe 
and strong. This is a good example of the shift in association we have 
had with the moon and of the fear of night, darkness, and strong feel- 
ings that arises in a culture that fears the feminine. Once upon a time 
the moon was an inspiration, an aid to dreaming, and an evoker of 
rich emotion and poetic sensibility. Before we developed our fear of 
22. 


[PDF page 42]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
altered states of consciousness, mania meant ecstatic revelation, and lu- 
nacy meant possession by the spirit of the moon.® In patriarchal soci- 
ety it has become more associated with craziness and instability. The 
line between inspiration and mania can be a fine one, as we see in the 
lives of many gifted people, but the linking of genius and madness in 
Western society may be more a result of the cultural tendency to re- 
press particular kinds of emotional and creative energy. This repres- 
sion can lead to neurosis and hysteria. The suppression of the wisdom 
of menstruation and of the moon may be the root of any lunacy that 
they bring. 
The moon governs the night and therefore the darkness—that 
which cannot readily be seen. The moon has a luminous beauty that 
pulls us into a different state of awareness. Whereas the sun lights the 
way for work and the round of daily life, the moon lights a different 
aspect of the human experience—the inner life, the imagination, the 
watery diffuse realms of the unconscious. The energy held within this 
realm is of a very different nature than the energy of the sun. It is a 
more sensitive, delicate, fragile light—one that can distort as much as 
it can illumine—and its illumination is variable. At full moon the 
moonlight illumines everything; at new moon there is total darkness. 
This sensitive, fragile, variable feeling is familiar to women. For many 
of us it is typical of the premenstrual phase, when we are hypersensi- 
tive and volatile. 
Our society is a sun-worshiping one in that it favors the profligate 
use of energy and behavior that is extroverted and outer-oriented. 
The quiet introvert, the poet, is not highly rewarded. Dreamers lose 
out in a culture that favors pragmatism and materialism. For me it is 
heaven to sit under a full moon by the water and dream. It feeds my 
imagination. It nurtures my spirit. It fills me with a sense of awe for 
life. 
30 


[PDF page 43]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
The associations that astrology holds with the moon are rooted in 
ancient ideas about the natural world. The moon relates to the femi- 
nine, the mind (especially the memory), emotional behavior, the 
home, the maternal, and the generative cycle. 
Lindsay River and Sally Gillespie write that “while the Sun’s light 
appears to have a constant and focused quality, the Moon’s light ap- 
pears cyclic and diffuse. There is a mystery in the Moon’s soft-focused 
light which opens up the way to the magical illuminations of the un- 
conscious. The wisdom attributed to the Moon throughout all cul- 
tures and ages is limitless.” 
I find that my mental state when I am menstruating is much more 
diffuse than during the rest of the month. Being on my moon makes 
me like the moon—dreamy, diffuse, unfocused. From this state a dif- 
ferent form of awareness is available—less judgmental and organized 
than my normal way of being, more open to new information. 
The Moon and the Goddess 
We are at a disadvantage today in that we no longer recognize, let 
alone worship, female deities. We are therefore denied reassurance of 
the “rightness” of our feminine processes. The one female deity that 
is worshiped in the Western world, Mary the mother of Jesus, is tra- 
ditionally depicted with a crescent moon at her feet, demonstrating 
the persistence of the symbolic relationship between the female and 
the moon. The ancient goddess Isis was always shown with the cres- 
cent moon. Diana/Artemis is the goddess of the moon, of hunting, of 
women and childbirth. 
Many ancient cultures had a concept of the Triple Goddess—the 
Maiden, Bride, and Crone. The Maiden is the virgin/young 
girl/princess, full of purity and promise, goddess of the new moon. 
31 


[PDF page 44]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
During the waxing cycle of the moon she develops into the Woman, 
the Bride, the fertile, creative, sexual, initiating priestess and queen of 
the full moon, who then, as the moon wanes, becomes the Crone, the 
goddess of death and of endings, of the period of moon-dark before 
the rebirth of the new moon. The ancients understood from this cycle 
that death always occurs before renewal, and thus the Crone was seen 
as she who destroys in order to bring forth new life. 
We can witness this cycle every month: the slim crescent of the 
new moon hangs delicately in the evening sky, and then she grows, 
like a pregnant belly, into the fullness of herself—an expression of 
abundance and fertility. Reaching a peak of roundness, lighting up the 
night sky almost eerily with her vibrant glow, the fullness completes 
itself and she begins to wane. 
Slowly, slowly, she dwindles to nothing, and there is complete 
darkness in the sky. And then out of the empty darkness, the sliver of 
crystal-clear new light can be seen, and she is reborn. This is a 
metaphor for a literal process that takes place within the body and the 
psyche of every women every month, as well as for the living and 
dying process of which we are all a part. 
The Moon and Women 
The moon affects the flow of water by governing the tides. Our body 
fluids are also governed by the waxing and waning of the moon. The 
cycle itself is fluid; it is constantly changing. And this is what a 
woman’s body is like—a continually shifting balance of hormones re- 
sulting in an ebb and flow of fluids: the blood that flows during men- 
struation; the dry phase after the end of the period; the runny 
egg-white mucus of ovulation; the juices of lovemaking; the tears of 
the premenstruum. Some women even ejaculate when they have an 
orgasm. This ebb and flow of fluids in the woman’s body is a crucial 
32 


[PDF page 45]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
part of her identity—it links her with the ocean and with the moon, 
with the waters of the planet and with the cycle of the seasons. 
Native Americans call menstruation the moon-time, and tradi- 
tionally, menstruating women went to a moon-lodge to rest and med- 
itate. In most cultures throughout the world the moon has been 
associated with women, most obviously because the average length of 
the menstrual cycle is 29.5 days, which is exactly the length of time 
that the moon takes to orbit the earth. The average length of preg- 
nancy is 265.8 days—almost precisely nine lunar months. This falls 
fourteen days short of the forty weeks that today’s doctors calculate as 
the length of pregnancy, but that forty weeks is measured from the 
beginning of the last period on the basis that, theoretically at least, the 
woman could have conceived at any time after the onset of bleeding. 
In fact, she is most likely to conceive on the fourteenth day of her 
cycle, making the actual period of pregnancy thirty-eight weeks—or 
266 days. 
The moon was considered the deity of women even as compar- 
atively recently as the Renaissance, when it was said that women 
should pray to the moon, rather than to God, for what they 
wanted.® 
In Scotland the full moon was considered the most fortunate time 
for women, and Scottish girls always got married at this time. They 
curtsied to the moon when they saw her, saying, “It is a fine moon 
God bless her.”? 
The relationship between the full moon and ovulation was 
known in ancient cultures. Women of the Native American Yurok 
tribe of Northern California prayed to the moon when they suffered 
from menstrual irregularity. It is probable that sitting out under the 
full moon triggered ovulation and returned their cycles to normal.!° 
In her book Lunaception, Louise Lacey demonstrates that ovulation 1s 
triggered by exposure to light at night. 
33 


[PDF page 46]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
Ovulation is the signal for the release of the hormones that stim- 
ulate the build-up of the endometrium, the lining of the womb. The 
endometrium is shed fourteen days after ovulation—out of the whole 
menstrual cycle, this time period of bleeding fourteen days after ovu- 
lation is the most regular and widely experienced by women every- 
where. This means that if the full moon triggers ovulation, then 
women will bleed fourteen days later, on the new moon. And indeed, 
it seems that this was generally the case in societies that did not use 
sources of light other than the sun and moon. When exposed only to 
natural light, women tend to menstruate with the new moon. 
In societies with a female/earth-centered spirituality, such as that 
of the Native Americans, and matrifocal Mediterranean cultures, the 
rhythm of the women’s cycle was used as the basis for the ritual life 
of the culture. Rites of celebration and fertility were held during the 
full moon, when women were ovulating, and rites of seclusion and 
purification were held at the new moon, when women were men- 
struating. 
These days we no longer live under natural light, and many fac- 
tors conspire to shift our periods away from a regular cycle; however, 
it may well be that there have always been particular women, and also 
times in every woman’s life, when menstruation occurs on the full 
moon. I don’t want to get too rigid about the idea that the new moon 
is the “right” time to menstruate. I find that when my period coin- 
cides with the full moon it can be a very strong experience. 
When I bleed with the full moon I am full of energy, full of juice, 
raring to go, happy, excited, full of sexuality and creativity. I am a 
channel for the bright light of the moon, and I sense her glow all 
around me. I usually require a time of peacefulness, but I need less 
time than when my period coincides with the new moon. My body 
wants to move, and I find myself dancing exuberantly. 
34 


[PDF page 47]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
When I bleed with the new moon I go very still and slow and re- 
treat deep inside myself. It is more of a cleansing, a purification. I ex- 
perience a drawing inside, a going deep within to the inner cave, the 
crucible of the psyche, a downward descent into the interior world, 
a time of the dark. 
The elements of shifting energy, introversion, and clearing out are 
always present for me when I am bleeding, but there is a different 
feeling depending on the moon’s phase. I experience these differences 
most powerfully when my period coincides exactly with the new 
moon or full moon, and less so when it comes elsewhere in the 
moon’s cycle. 
Penelope Shuttle reports in her groundbreaking book The Wise 
Wound that she has found her creativity to be particularly pronounced 
when she menstruates on the full moon. She and her coauthor, Peter 
Redgrove, suggest that menstruation at the new moon is more con- 
nected to a biological creative cycle, and at the full moon more to an 
artistic creative cycle—or, at any rate, a creativity that is not oriented 
to the birth of a child, but rather to the birth of something else.!! I 
wonder if these differences between full moon and new moon bleed- 
ing at least partly explain why some women feel energized by their 
period, whereas others feel like withdrawing and being very quiet. 
BLOOD 
Like the moon, blood is one of the oldest and central symbols for hu- 
mankind, representing for us the magic of life. Blood is the primary 
symbol of the life force. It is found in the most ancient of art, as red 
ocher painted on figurines and on cave walls. Blood is one of the ear- 
liest sacraments used by humankind. In Paleolithic times, “The dead 
35 


[PDF page 48]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
were buried in the fetal position with their arms across their chests, 
their bodies marked with red ocher, the pigmented earth, symbolic of 
life-giving blood.”!? 
Blood has the power to create an impact. How does it feel when 
we see our blood coming out of our bodies? Blood is one of the man- 
ifestations of the mystery of our existence. Where did we come from? 
How did we get here? We know we are alive because our heart beats 
and pumps the blood through our veins. Our blood pulses and flows; 
blood moves through us continually. 
We speak of drawing blood, of dripping blood, of people fainting 
when they see their blood. This occurs because of shock and of the 
fear of death overcoming us suddenly as we look at our blood flowing 
out of the body. Instinct tells us that when our blood is running freely 
from the body, we may die. The blood is supposed to be inside the 
body at all times—except for during menstruation and childbirth. 
We all have rich red blood throbbing through the veins, pulsating 
gently along the arteries, and coursing through every cell. Carrying 
nutrients, dispersing waste, blood is the carrier, the conduit that en- 
ables our life force to flow. 
Kings and queens are said to have blue or purple blood. Royal 
blood, peasant blood, Irish blood—we still speak of lineage and an- 
cestry in terms of blood. The concept of lineage is synonymous with 
the idea of shared blood. Tribal ceremonies often involve the mixing 
of blood to become symbolic relatives—blood brothers and sisters. At 
gypsy weddings in Europe, the bride and groom traditionally ate 
bread that held a drop of each other’s blood on it, or even sometimes 
mingled blood directly from cuts on the hands or arms. 
The color red has its own symbolism, which is related to ideas 
about blood. To the Chinese red means wealth and is worn at wed- 
dings and other ceremonies where wealth is desired. The Maoris 
thought that anything became sacred once it was colored red, and 
36 


[PDF page 49]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
Easter eggs were traditionally colored red. In Celtic Britain, to be 
stained red meant to be chosen by the Goddess as a king.!* 
In some Cultures there is a belief in the mysterious healing nature 
of menstrual blood. Medieval physicians believed that the menstrual 
blood of a young girl could heal leprosy. They also thought that it 
acted as an aphrodisiac. !4 
Menstrual blood was considered sacred by many cultures. In the 
Tantric tradition men became spiritually powerful by ingesting men- 
strual blood. Still today in the group rituals of the left-handed Tantric 
path, menstrual blood is taken along with red wine as a ritual drink.!° 
The Taoists, Egyptians, Persians, and Celts all had similar beliefs.1® 
Menstrual blood has also been used as a fertilizer and may have 
been a key in women’s development of agriculture. In the autumn 
festival of the Thesmophoria, the women of ancient Greece mixed 
menstrual blood with the seed corn. 
The women, who according to some authorities in- 
vented agriculture, did so because only they had the secret of 
the strong fertility of the seed corn. The reason for this was 
that originally the women mixed the seed corn with men- 
strual blood, which was the best possible fertilizer, before 
planting it. Since the men had no magic blood of this kind, 
they could not grow corn as well as the women could, any 
more than they could grow babies.!7 
Blood as Sacrament 
In the Christian church the sacrament is taken in the form of red 
wine, a symbol of the blood of Christ. But red wine had been used as 
a symbol of the blood of the Great Mother, the Holy Woman, for 
centuries before Christ. In many cultures, ceremonies took place in 
37 


[PDF page 50]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
which women and men would take the symbolic blood of life in the 
form of red wine—for example, in the Dionysian mysteries and the 
Tantric rituals. Sometimes this was consciously acknowledged as being 
a symbol of the menstrual blood, the magical fluid out of which 
human life was created. 
In matrifocal cultures blood was considered a carrier of magic be- 
cause it represented the mystery of the life force. Elinor Gadon sug- 
gests that “the earliest rituals may have honored the menstrual cycle, 
the womb blood that nurtured the new life.”!8 
Blood was the main symbol for the wellspring of existence and 
the mystery that sends us forth into this life. As such it was revered. 
The fact that women bled once a month meant that they were closer 
to this wellspring, and this power innate in the female body was a 
large part of why the ineffable was revered in female form. 
Later, as cultures throughout the world became patriarchal, pu- 
berty rituals developed for males that also involved the shedding of 
blood, such as the subincision practiced by the aborigines of Australia 
and the breast piercing in the Sun Dance of the Lakota Sioux. These 
rituals are imitations of the blood loss that women experience naturally. 
The custom of blood sacrifice is thought to have originated in the 
practice of using menstrual blood as a sacrament. As male priests 
gained power and the feminine perspective waned, so the power of 
menstruation, an exclusively female act, was set apart from the rituals 
of worship and reverence. Instead of honoring the Goddess and God 
within, religion turned to the idea of an external force that needed to 
be placated by the offering of the blood of an animal or young person. 
This can be seen as a distortion of the more ancient knowledge of 
blood as representing the sacred nature of life itself. Offering the men- 
strual blood is entirely different from offering the blood of a being 
who has to die in order for its blood to be offered. Offering menstrual 
38 


[PDF page 51]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
blood was and is an affirmation of life, a recognition of its sanctity, of 
its magic. 
It is very likely that male envy of the blood released by women 
has fueled many of the negative taboos around menstruation. The 
concept that menstrual blood is a pollutant is a distortion of the an- 
cient idea that it was a sacrament. 
EARTH 
Like many people I know, I gain a great sense of peace and connect- 
edness from walking in the wilds or simply sitting quietly on the earth 
or gardening, having my hands deep in the soil. We need this sense 
of connection to the natural world, to the planet we inhabit. When 
I’ve been in the city too long a part of me begins to go crazy, and I 
long for the beach, for the woods, for the feeling of real earth beneath 
my feet. As a friend of mine once said after living too long in London, 
“T just want to rip the concrete up off the streets and find the earth be- 
neath it.” 
The earth has been considered female and sacred throughout his- 
tory. The Earth Mother was recognized as the source of nutrition, of 
shelter and clothing. Many cultures have shared a sense of the earth as 
Divine Parent, whose gifts extend beyond the provision of physical 
nurturance and include moral and spiritual guidance. In Russia, instead 
of touching a Bible when taking an oath, a peasant would place a clod 
of earth on his head, invoking the curse of the Mother if he broke his 
word,!? and in Native American vision quest, the behavior of the nat- 
ural world around one is seen as a source of special information. 
The earth, like the menstruating woman, has lost her status as 
sacred mother as humans have become increasingly “civilized” and 
39 


[PDF page 52]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
distanced from nature. We have in many ways lost our instinctual 
relationship with the ground beneath our feet, and as a result we are 
filled with fear of poverty and scarcity. Our over-anxious hustle for 
ever greater material wealth may in part result from this loss of con- 
nection with the source of our physical nourishment and well- 
being. 
As described above, the women of ancient Greece, and doubtless 
many other cultures, used their menstrual blood to fertilize the fields 
and had an intense and intimate relationship with the land because 
they bled onto it. As women, we are of the earth in a powerful way: 
She and we are the nurturers, the givers of life. We have an instinctive 
relationship of similarity with her, and giving our blood back onto the 
earth strengthens this relationship. (See chapter 10 for rituals regard- 
ing blood and the earth.) 
SNAKE 
I used to be terrified of snakes. I couldn’t imagine why people would 
have them as pets. I remember once walking in a park and seeing a 
man carrying a huge python. I wouldn’t go too close, but I stood and 
stared for a long time—there was intense fascination intermingled 
with my fear and revulsion. From the story of the serpent in the Gar- 
den of Eden onward, we have been conditioned to be repulsed by 
snakes. 
In contrast, many of the earth-centered cultures of the world have 
had a reverence for the snake. They have seen in its cyclical shedding 
of the skin a metaphor for the birth/life/death cycle of humankind. 
It has also been used to illustrate the little deaths that we undergo dur- 
ing our life—the shedding of childhood at puberty, the shedding of 
40 


[PDF page 53]

MOON, BLOOD, EARTH, AND SNAKE 
fertility at menopause, the shedding of relationships with the death of 
loved ones. That the.snake lives on in a new and purified form after 
the skin has been shed has been universally used as a metaphor for the 
cleansing power of change and transformation as well as a symbol of 
everlasting life. 
In matrifocal societies the snake was a friend, ally, and helper of 
the Goddess and of her priestesses and priests. In Ancient Egypt the 
hieroglyph for snake also meant Goddess. Priestesses used snake 
venom to induce trance, and would often have a snake familiar who 
lived with them, coiled in trance itself much of the time. 
One of the main reasons for the association of women and snakes 
is that we share a pattern of cyclical shedding. For the snake it is a skin 
that is shed, for the woman the lining of the womb when she men- 
struates. The skin is shed, the death of the potential babe gives rise to 
the rebirth of the woman. The snake as a universal symbol of renewal 
gives us a vital clue into the menstrual mysteries. Our monthly shed- 
ding is the key to our own renewal, it is the key to our health. Every 
month we have the opportunity to renew and refresh our whole be- 
ings—physically, psychologically, and spiritually. 
41 


[PDF page 54]

u 
ni Snopes ee a Mapa 
mt. toh : 5 4m a2 a ir sis sige sets KP 
: Pei iniaghy aaa : ee ee 
eA Sh mh = Pik et 
"cies teal » eanbniesshse — Sigel % 
Shay ek) reas Pam ating eae oo. 16 
. = forscraiorsciest Ap irreatesl maaan 
. 7 ii pbeeretaned galleria sine wecshumelye 1. arpe anbe sp a ba ai else Masa, 
: . ne ore, si Airey shia Levikigeleowott ake 14 cat, thn Tins meres a i 
o¢ - ew ET ‘te Lpalegpre See Ly av ep sila a at, shunervine Sy ied 
aptly idea aia eaat aig tae ol tele” ; 
= qe! any! The St ky fd go et ma 
ae ; = tees = wwleryr bi: ty neg los a ne eh ll OD Baar 
a JS Of}4e 1 wh paaalitinge Ms © hacia ‘MG th a3 
Ren wo Gi 6 ewer te ete vioaemgihda 
7 : dull oes ; Se (-<ee Soy 
' ead oe in 
en, a i 
i 
As ee 


[PDF page 55]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
In my twenties I spent a lot of time studying Chinese medicine, and 
the discovery that the Chinese have a very different attitude toward 
menstruation stimulated me to rethink my beliefs and practices. I 
learned that traditionally the Chinese recommend resting during 
menstruation and that they consider the cause of many gynecological 
complaints to be faulty behavior during menstruation, for example 
getting cold, lifting heavy objects, overworking, and eating inappro- 
priate food. 
Up until this point I hadn’t really thought about my period very 
much other than to consider it a nuisance. I had been raised to grin 
and bear it and carry on as normal and to suppress my desire to lie 
around in a dream for a couple of days a month. I also suffered from 
bad cramps, which I usually treated with painkillers, although I knew 
that rest and a hot water bottle would soothe them—it was just that 
I couldn’t allow myself to rest. 
43 


[PDF page 56]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
My Chinese teachers encouraged me to honor my body feelings, 
because they had a medical model that supported the idea of rest dur- 
ing menses. It was wonderful to discover a whole body of medical 
knowledge and folklore that recommended that I do exactly what I 
felt like doing when I had my period. Suddenly I found that it was 
okay to indulge myself and to spend the first day or so of my period 
lying down and spacing out in a comfortable and quiet environment, 
sipping hot herb tea and allowing my body to have a rest. As I expe- 
rienced the healing that began to take place in my whole body, I re- 
alized that the menstrual period is a natural time for women to rest, a 
time in every month when the body requests a time, a few hours at 
least, of relaxation. By cutting through this natural tendency and at- 
tempting to fit into a male-dominated work schedule, I had begun to 
make myself sick. 
Beginning to follow my body rather than ordering it around after 
me was a major shift. But that wasn’t all—the discovery that not 
everyone thought the same way about menstruation opened up my 
own thinking. I began to realize that there was a wisdom inherent in 
the body itself and that my own culture didn’t necessarily have a very 
wise or useful attitude to the processes of being female. The recogni- 
tion that my attitude to menstruation had developed in the context of 
a society that has diminished the female for several thousand years was 
a major step in the development of my understanding. 
I realized that not everybody everywhere thinks that menstrua- 
tion is an inconvenient event to be ignored and not everyone every- 
where thinks that it is yet more proof that women are inferior to men. 
However, the Chinese model only went so far. It never ap- 
proached issues of power and spirituality, and although the emphasis 
on rest was very useful, it kept me locked in a mind-set that said 
44 


[PDF page 57]

HER BLOOD TIS GOLD 
menstruation was weakness rather than strength. It was when I came 
across the teachings of the Native American tradition a few years later 
that I began to understand that something very profound was going 
on while I was lying about and spacing out—it wasn’t simply that I 
was resting a tired body and rebuilding lost red blood cells. 
In the Native American tradition a woman is considered to be at 
her most powerful, psychically and spiritually, when she is menstru- 
ating. Resting during menstruation is seen in the context of one’s at- 
tention being elsewhere—on the spiritual planes, gathering wisdom. 
The different feelings that women have when they menstruate are 
understood to be part of something very meaningful about the cycles 
of the woman’s body. In many Native American societies, before their 
traditional practices were suppressed, the women would go to a men- 
strual hut (a moon-lodge) to pass the time of their bleeding. 
Most of the women would bleed at the same time, usually coin- 
ciding with the new moon. In Daughters of Copper Woman, Anne 
Cameron describes the lives of women of the Nootka people of the 
Pacific Northwest, and reports that the atmosphere in the moon- 
lodge was one of a holiday or party. The women would play games 
and talk and rub each other’s backs to ease cramps. They would sit on 
special moss padding and give their blood back to the Earth Mother.! 
It wasn’t only a time for rest and relaxation, but also a time for 
gathering spiritual wisdom. In the tale of Tem Eyos Ki, a woman liv- 
ing at the time when the men of the tribe began to assume domi- 
nance over the women, it is during her seclusion during 
menstruation that she comes to an awakening. As a result of the wis- 
dom she finds in the moon-lodge (called the waiting house by the 
Nootka), she emerges after four days and sings a song of great beauty 
and love that awakens the tribe to the imbalance between the men 
45 


[PDF page 58]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
and the women.” This story echoes the Cherokee belief that the 
menstruating woman is performing a function of cleansing and of 
gathering wisdom that is beneficial not only for the woman herself 
but also for the whole tribe. 
One of the most inspiring accounts of menstrual beliefs and prac- 
tices that I have read comes from a woman of the Yurok people of 
Northern California, paraphrased by Thomas Buckley: 
A menstruating woman should isolate herself because this 
is the time when she is at the height of her powers. Thus the 
time should not be wasted in mundane tasks and social dis- 
tractions, nor should one’s concentration be broken by con- 
cerns with the opposite sex. Rather, all of one’s energies 
should be applied in concentrated meditation “to find out the 
purpose of your life” and toward the “accumulation” of spir- 
itual energy. The menstrual shelter, or room, is “like the 
men’s sweathouse,” a place where you “go into yourself and 
make yourself stronger.” The blood that flows serves to “pu- 
rify” the woman, preparing her for spiritual accomplishment. 
A woman must use a scratching implement, instead of 
scratching absent-mindedly with her fingers, as an aid in fo- 
cusing her full attention on her body by making even the 
most natural and spontaneous of actions fully conscious and 
intentional: “You should feel all of your body exactly as it is, 
and pay attention.”* 
It was usual for most Native American groups to hold puberty rit- 
uals for the young women, and for many, including the Apache, these 
were the most elaborate and beloved of all their ceremonies. The pu- 
berty rituals of the Nootka graphically demonstrate the respect and 
46 


[PDF page 59]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
reverence that they had for women. After a girl had her first moon- 
time there would be a big party for her. Then she would undergo a 
ritual of endurance, in which she would be taken far out to sea and left 
to make her own way home by swimming back to land. On arriving 
back at the shore she would be greeted by the whole village, and from 
that moment on she would be recognized as a woman and seen as 
ready for the responsibilities of marriage and children.4 
The description of the training for this rite of passage emphasizes 
both physical strength and the development of character. It was con- 
sidered important that a woman be able to demonstrate her capacity 
for patience and perseverance.° 
This teaching seems so apt, and so lacking in our modern world. 
Our initiation of girls into womanhood is superficial in compari- 
son—learning to put on make-up, wearing a first bra, using a tampon 
for the first time. Many women get married and get pregnant with- 
out having any sense of their own capacity for endurance, physically 
or psychologically. Small wonder then that so many girl-women elect 
to give birth with the aid of pain-killers and a technology that robs 
them of the experience of their own strength. This lack of challenge 
and strengthening at puberty may also contribute to the self-hate that 
afflicts so many young women and leads to eating disorders and ad- 
dictions. 
The puberty rituals of the Pygmies of the Congo, described by 
Colin Turnbull in The Forest People, also depict a culture with a posi- 
tive view of women and of their power. Unlike the Pygmies, the 
nearby African villagers view the arrival of a girl’s first menstrual blood 
as an evil omen, “something best concealed and not talked about in 
public. The girl is an object of suspicion, scorn, repulsion, and anger.” 
In contrast, the Pygmies greet menstrual blood as a symbol of life, and 
when a Pygmy girl has her first blood it is considered a gift. The whole 
47 


[PDF page 60]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
group joins in a puberty festival called the elima, and as Turnbull notes, 
“the elima is one of the happiest, most joyful occasions in their lives.” 
The elima involves all kinds of physical activities and much play- 
ing and running in the forest, as well as training by the older women 
in the elima house. The girls learn the songs of the women and they 
sing loudly through the forest, “so that everyone should know that 
they were the Bamelina, the people of the elima, girls who had been 
blessed with the blood and were now women.”® 
Turnbull notes that the Pygmies, unlike their village-dwelling 
neighbors, have a benign worldview—that is, they think of the forest 
in which they live as a place that will readily meet their needs for food 
and shelter as well as their needs for spiritual protection. They are 
completely at home in the forest, and they have a relationship of love 
and respect with their environment. This seems to be intricately re- 
lated to their positive attitude to the feminine. 
The Yurok and the Nootka also had a good relationship with 
their environment. They were well adapted to it, and the ocean and 
rivers and forests nearby gave them ample food. Like the Pygmies, 
they saw menstruation as a time of power and the puberty of girls a 
time of strength and celebration. 
It seems that a benign worldview is a prerequisite for a positive at- 
titude toward one’s own world—one’s own body—and most specif- 
ically, toward the female body, as that is a microcosm of the larger 
female body, the earth. 
This is clearly reflected in the attitudes of these two cultures to 
menstruation. It is interesting to note that as Euro-Western culture 
becomes more earth-conscious and awakened to the ecological dam- 
age that our lack of respect for the earth is creating, the female is also 
becoming more respected. 
48 


[PDF page 61]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
Menstruation beliefs and rituals have fascinated anthropologists 
for years, and there is a growing body of research on the subject. If 
you are interested and want to find out more about different cultures 
and their perspectives on menstruation, I strongly recommend the 
book Blood Magic, edited by Thomas Buckley and Alma Gottlieb. 
There are also several other books mentioned in the bibliography at 
the back of this book. 
49 


[PDF page 62]

Ti ali ‘ pee pepe ; Beipy 
: bet os : aoe ‘A mers ie aA sean 
iy i tretecth ta af fea aye AD aatPie ramet man =o 
_- a Scion, sv Names. (a a4 
> oe hi s-< fj n@ aw il eA wigs oy fl-tactiet ms 
os oe ie (pir siermgh than a wa ayer? teary) 
- : a tia - of ee t iinet of Sai nie ap ae) - ts me cy 
id “es Serre Wet) (ee Te Ae ioe WO ei 
a 
Loe TPE a A - p25 se tel Log 
——- - a j 
| Ny: = » J r oh ov he i 
- ie if ma iy! =¢ if ev oT 
4 ayh = = ee 
a ° : rai 1 Ae 
7) ae = . 9 oy Re) § 
#7) » he - 5 " a 
: am = Pe. ls —— Fa ne i - 
: 7 ——— _ 
uv = ue ne ~~ a q ® oO 
a iy es on \ 
i “ = > 
: 
% 1 at 
RS : Fai f fi 7 ~~ ‘ a a vaners 
e — ih "ee. mah lat "} - an 
' 
a ——— 
‘ 
j 
~~ ras 
Y A aie 


[PDF page 63]

PEAGRe TL 20 Wwe © 
RECLAIMING 
THE CYCLE 


[PDF page 64]

mii! Uae ts ee 
“eat wea yen Sr 
Nota | Wo ot Pa r 
say Ps ch Ae oe ie A ain! iv ea) ny fan | 
.s LF eet iat we 
; { 1 , - iy Wil n a aes Ne 
SR AA ek LE , _ ww ran 
= io ‘i 7 Cie! = n en 
ine Sh NY 7 ! 7 a) ' y iP, ‘ - : 
( ¥ ay y 
Hi) 7 Vv A ft 7 oh if - 
| Laie, ven 6 
— a 
BLING ait | = 7 oe 
eed 1Al 
j =o) a 
} ‘ 
a y 
; oe : , 
1 3 a - 
— =A 
} 
i 
\ 
a ~~ 
ne 
— ; 
: iy 
vin i‘ 
‘ y ry if 


[PDF page 65]

4 
THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
When I was growing up I swore that I would not turn out like my fe- 
male forebears. My mother and grandmothers seemed to have a much 
more restricted life than the men of the family, and I could see that 
they commanded less respect as soon as the conversation veered from 
the personal to the world of ideas and opinions. I was a well-read, 
opinionated girl who placed a high value on intellectual respect, and 
I didn’t see any reason why my opinion should have less weight than 
a man’s. My parents supported me in this; they wanted me to have a 
good education and to have confidence in myself. I was smart, and I 
knew it. 
In the outside world it was clear that it was the fathers who had the 
money and the power and the freedom and the control. I never saw 
any women who had a level of autonomy and control to match that 
of the men. The only women I knew who worked were the teachers 
at school. All other women were mothers. I promised myself that I 
53 


[PDF page 66]

HERE LOODRISEGO LD 
would not have a life like that, where I had to subordinate myself to a 
husband and family. 
The problem with breaking tradition in this way, albeit aided and 
abetted by my family, was that I tended to see everything about my 
mother’s and grandmothers’ priorities, skills, and worldviews as some- 
how old hat, backward-looking, emotional rather than intellectual. In 
rebelling against the image of womanhood as the supporter of men and 
the nurturer of the family, I threw out much of the value of the femi- 
nine. It took a conscious wish and deep inner work to begin loving 
myself as a woman and to stop running away from my female nature. 
At school and university I was trained in an analytical model of 
perception that I valued above feelings and intuition. Growing up in 
the sixties and seventies meant that I was part of a generation that ex- 
perimented with drugs to help shift our consciousness into an aware- 
ness of the value of the nonrational. This had the effect of somewhat 
compensating for the one-sidedness of my education. (These days I 
would recommend other ways to escape from the prisons of over- 
analytical minds.) But despite my explorations of different states of 
consciousness, as a teenager I had already made certain decisions 
about myself and my life based on an abhorrence of the female and 
the diminished role she was forced to carry in the society in which 
I was raised. 
These decisions carried on into my twenties, often translated into 
an unconscious awkwardness with the female aspect of myself. I had 
no role models of the kind of woman I wanted to be. I was making 
it up as I went along, and sometimes the only way I could do what I 
wanted appeared to be by dispensing with the female within alto- 
gether. And in a subtle way, that translated into my sense of my body. 
I wore jeans most of the time, and I eschewed much of what would 
be considered female. I kept my home in good shape and I was sym- 
pathetic with my friends—but I valued my work in the outside world 
54 


[PDF page 67]

THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
more than anything else, because that appeared to be what society 
placed most value upon. 
By the time I was twenty I had been taking the Great Liberator 
(the pill) for about two years. I noticed that I was getting increasingly 
emotional and upset during my so-called period and these temporary 
bursts of hysteria felt very strange, as if I really wasn’t myself. I decided 
to stop taking the pill and see if that had anything to do with it. I was 
also beginning to have fantasies about getting pregnant although that 
was, to my conscious mind, an impossibility. I was much too young, 
unmarried, and aware that my friends who had kids young seemed to 
have a very difficult time. No, that was a Bad Idea, only entered into 
by irresponsible women who didn’t know what to do with their lives 
and who resorted to their biological functions. Well I was going to 
have a career and be a useful member of society, not a mere breeder. 
The split in me between the instincts of my inner woman and my 
masculine-oriented social conditioning was severe. And I didn’t real- 
ize it. I thought I was a feminist. It didn’t occur to me, at that age, that 
the reason my less organized friends with babies had such a hard time 
was because society was arranged in such a way that young women 
had very little power. And no one seemed to be very interested in 
helping them. I really did think, and it is very painful to admit this, 
that it was their fault, that they had been stupid to get pregnant. I was 
going to be very careful that it didn’t happen to me. 
That was one part of me—the other side was flirting with the idea 
of pregnancy. So I came off the pill, partly because I suspected that it 
was messing me up and also because there was the glimmer of a re- 
productive drive stirring in my being. 
After a couple of months I felt like “myself” again, and I realized 
that despite the convenience of the pill, I had actually felt cheated 
because my periods were so light. This was when I began to realize 
that menstruating was an important part of my life, a rhythm that I 
3) 


[PDF page 68]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
depended on for my psychic and physical health, and that I ignored 
or suppressed it at my peril. 
I became interested in the whole cycle, and investigated natural 
birth control. My bedroom was plastered with charts as I attempted to 
track my mucus flow. I never was very good about taking my tem- 
perature, and I’ve always disliked thermometers. But I did begin to re- 
alize that if 1 took the time to tune in, I actually had a lot of awareness 
about what was happening in my body. I could feel a twinge over my 
ovary when I ovulated. I could track the subtle shifts in my sexuality, 
the levels of introversion and extroversion throughout the month. I 
began to understand that it was possible to befriend this mysterious 
cycle that had always seemed a burden to me. I liked knowing what 
my body was up to. 
Despite the glimmers of awareness that this awakening brought, 
when I became pregnant a few years later I still had an attitude of ne- 
glect toward my body when its needs interfered with my work. I re- 
member being extremely hungry but putting other things before 
eating. I miscarried, and the grief that I felt in my body for the lost 
baby and the frustration of a pregnancy cut short awakened me to my 
body and its essential femaleness in a shocking way. 
This was an experience that set me apart from the world of men, 
and the intellect, in a stark and thorough way. I had no conscious re- 
sources within me to deal with the feelings that overwhelmed me. I 
was full of loss for a being that had at most been six weeks old. It 
didn’t make any sense. But I could feel my body grieving in a pow- 
erful way. I cried endlessly and was depressed throughout the rest of 
what would have been the pregnancy. All I wanted was to get preg- 
nant again, but I didn’t conceive. My husband didn’t understand my 
pain, and I didn’t understand or accept it enough to be able to explain 
it to him. I was lost in an unprepared-for sea of hormonal anguish. 
Being a woman was taking me into regions of feeling that were vast 
56 


[PDF page 69]

THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
and uncontrollable. Why had no one prepared me for this? Why 
didn’t anyone talk about the fact that a woman’s physiology had such 
a powerful effect on her mental and emotional state? Was I some kind 
of aberration—or was this another of the facets of female experience 
consigned to the secret compartment of life? 
One day an acupuncture client of mine said, “I had three miscar- 
riages you know, and every time I felt the most terrible grief. No one 
understands the pain of it who hasn’t been through it.” 
I felt a bit better after that, and I realized that I didn’t have a sin- 
gle woman in my family or circle of friends who had had a miscarriage 
and who could have reassured me from her own experience. But 
many of them had been through pregnancy and childbirth—if mis- 
carriage could provoke such a flood of feeling, what on earth was giv- 
ing birth like? I began talking to women and reading on the subject, 
and I began to see that there was still a folkloric tradition that under- 
stood mood swings and hyper-emotionality but that this traditional 
knowledge didn’t fit into the modern world. It seemed to be being 
taken less and less into account. Were women becoming less emo- 
tional, or was society refusing to acknowledge the relationship be- 
tween cycles and mood? It seemed to me that much of the richness 
of female experience was being cauterized by the machine age, by the 
linear mind that works in weeks rather than moon cycles and talks of 
pregnancy as forty weeks rather than nine moons; that calls a woman’s 
blood-time her “period” rather than any of the more beautiful names 
that have been used in other times and cultures—the most often heard 
being the term used by the Native Americans, moon-time. 
After the miscarriage my moon-time became extremely painful. I 
had truly terrible cramps, and atrocious premenstrual rages. My mar- 
riage was falling apart, and the chief reason seemed to be our inability 
to understand each other’s maleness and femaleness. We used to joke 
about men and women needing to live apart for their own sanity. But 
57 


[PDF page 70]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
really, we each didn’t understand or respect the needs and rhythms of 
our own gender. I would become enraged every month in order to 
send my husband away, instead of being able to say gracefully “I would 
like some time alone when I am bleeding.” 
THE WOUND MAKES ITSELF KNOWN 
In my late twenties I discovered that I had cervical dysplasia (abnor- 
mal cells on the surface of the cervix), and the gynecologist wanted 
to cauterize my cervix. I was horror-struck, and my body recoiled 
from such a brutal procedure. I knew that this was not going to be 
healing for me, and it would just further damage an area already 
wounded by a clumsy D&C after the miscarriage. 
It wasn’t only the procedure that appeared brutal to me—the gy- 
necologist had a brutal manner. For one thing, he was a man, which 
I initially accepted; I later realized that my true reaction was intense 
discomfort. It was incongruous to have a man coldly and clinically 
discussing the condition of my cervix. I hated the way he winked at 
me when he told me to “Take your bottom half things off.” I hated 
having an unknown man inserting cold metal instruments inside me 
and demonstrating the results of his tests to spotty male students. They 
all stood around, three of them, all male, staring into a microscope 
that was inserted into my vagina, as I lay with my feet wide apart in 
stirrups, like some kind of captive animal. I was deeply offended by 
this. He was treating a very dear and sensitive part of my body as if he 
temporarily owned it. And I was outraged when he took a biopsy 
from my cervix without telling me first what he was going to do. The 
most piercing pain I have ever felt shot through the interior of my 
body. I screamed, and asked, shocked and terrified, ““What have you 
done to me?” 
58 


[PDF page 71]

THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
“Oh be quiet,” he said. “It doesn’t hurt. There aren’t enough 
nerve endings there for it to hurt.” 
After that I didn’t trust him to do anything else to me, and I told 
him that I felt that there was a psychological reason for my illness, and 
that I preferred to use gentle methods to heal it. He exploded and told 
me I was a foolish woman and would undoubtably die as a result of re- 
fusing his surgery. I burst into tears and ran out of his office. How dare 
he talk to me like that, as if I was nothing, just a body for his skills to 
work on. I knew that his threat was an attempt to bully me, and one 
that had no justifiable foundation—the level of dysplasia I had was mild 
and had a good chance of getting better without surgical treatment. 
I had little faith in the procedures of modern medicine because 
they paid no attention to factors that I was sure were involved in my 
dis-ease, such as my recent divorce, and the way my periods had been 
recently, and various other factors of which I had only a glimmering 
awareness. All they looked at was my cervix—and I knew very well 
that all of me was involved in this aberration from the norm. It 
seemed poor medicine not to take the other factors into account. 
My lack of faith made me very uncomfortable whenever I went 
for a doctor’s visit. It had been several years since I had been near a 
doctor, and in the interim I had been practicing acupuncture and liv- 
ing a lifestyle around naturopathic principles. I was shocked when I 
rediscovered the mind-set that accompanies modern medicine. I 
would try and talk about my state of mind and how I knew that it was 
affecting my health and that I was sure that there were less invasive 
methods of healing that I could use. After all, this was a long way from 
being a threatening condition. I could afford to take the time I needed 
to heal more naturally without cutting and cauterizing and traumatiz- 
ing my body.! 
No one wanted to listen. They just wanted to do invasive and un- 
pleasant things to me, as fast as possible please, without, it seemed to 
59 


[PDF page 72]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
me, due consideration of the possible outcome. They wanted a quiet 
compliant patient with no self-awareness. They had stolen my right to 
my own process of illness and recovery. It seemed obvious to me that 
if I didn’t get the meaning from the message my cervix was giving me, 
then my body would try again, and I would become sick, perhaps in 
a different way. It didn’t make sense to go ahead and permanently scar 
my cervix, possibly affecting my ability to carry a child to full term, 
without trying to understand why my body was behaving in this way. 
Each time I had to have a biopsy (I had changed to a different 
doctor and hospital by this point), the doctor showed no interest in 
my distaste for the procedure or for my sense that it might be trau- 
matizing an already upset area. 
I knew that the whole thing was tied in with my periods, which 
had been strange recently. My cycle had shortened to twenty-one 
days, and I had a very different blood flow. I knew instinctively that 
something was going on with my womb and that the dysplasia was a 
symptom of an imbalance that was deeper. I suspected there was an 
important issue for me to get hold of. 
I realized after a while that I really wanted to heal myself. It just 
didn’t feel right to me to go through this surgical business. But I de- 
cided I would have to, so I opted for the least invasive remedy—laser 
treatment. Then a series of interesting synchronicities prevented me 
from having the treatment. It was delayed and delayed, and before the 
rescheduled date for the treatment, I went to a workshop led by a man 
who teaches the Native American tradition. 
He told me that in the Native American teachings a menstruat- 
ing woman has the potential to be more psychically and spiritually 
powerful than anyone, male or female, at any other time. That turned 
my conditioned pictures of reality upside down. I’d always experi- 
enced my period as a time of weakness and difficulty—what on earth 
was the man talking about? 
60 


[PDF page 73]

THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
When I asked him specifically about my wounded cervix he asked 
me a lot of questions and then said that he thought that my problem 
was rooted in a denial of my femaleness and that he saw that I had 
negative ideas deep in my unconscious about what it meant to be a 
woman. He told me to dig a hole in my garden every now and then 
and speak all the negative thoughts I could think of about the state of 
being female into the hole, then cover it up so that the earth could 
transform the energy (just as it transforms waste matter into compost, 
so it has the capacity to transform our thoughts). 
When I went home I tried this technique. I felt pretty silly, and I 
was glad that no one could see into my tiny garden. I didn’t know that 
I had so many bad feelings about being a woman lurking in my highly 
educated feminist mind until I did this exercise. It was painful, and it 
was very effective. 
I started looking at how I behaved when I had my period, and the 
first thing I saw was that I used tampons. I tuned in to my body and in 
my imagination asked my vagina and cervix what they thought of 
tampons. “Ugh,” they said, unequivocally. “Horrible things.” And I 
thought about it and realized that maybe there was something impor- 
tant about the blood flowing freely out of the vagina. It occurred to 
me that the tampons might be irritating my cervix, and I wondered 
if my initial difficulty with them in my teens hadn’t in fact been a wise 
instinct of my body. I had used tampons without ever thinking about 
the effect they might be having on me—they were a source of liber- 
ation, I thought, one that allowed me to act as if I didn’t really have 
a period. 
“Aha!” I thought. “One that allowed me to pretend I wasn’t re- 
ally having a period.” And I watched that thought, and the thoughts 
behind it, and I began to realize that I had a background belief that my 
period was something to be ignored and suppressed as much as pos- 
sible. Suppression was, I knew, one of the main causes of illness and 
61 


[PDF page 74]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
imbalance. Maybe my periods wanted to have a more central place in 
my life and in my awareness. I began to experiment with that. 
If my bleeding started at the weekend, I stopped driving and 
stayed home, relaxing in my garden. I remember that it was summer 
and I lay in the sunshine, just experiencing my bleeding. It was inter- 
esting to me—I felt so much better if I just lay about and did noth- 
ing. If my period started during the working week it was more of a 
problem, but I would try and rest as much as I could. It was a couple 
of years before I had the space to really go into what was happening 
when I was bleeding, but in the beginning it was a major step to allow 
my period into my life just that much. To sit through the pain instead 
of reaching automatically for a pain-kiJler, to wear pads instead of 
tampons and look at my blood and feel the blood coming out of me, 
to just sit and begin to tune in to my bleeding body, to get the first 
glimmers of a sense of peace that came from just Being, letting go of 
Doing. 
At last I began to feel that I was getting in touch with the root of 
my problems, but the way forward seemed blurry to me. It was clear 
that in order to heal myself, to become at ease with myself and com- 
fortable in my skin, I had to love my womanliness to a depth that I 
had not yet plumbed. And in order to do this I had to realize that 
once again, I had no role models. 
I felt very alone. I had a good friend who paid attention to her pe- 
riods, and her friendship helped me enormously at this time—but I 
also wanted an older woman as a guide, someone who understood the 
wholeness of being female in a way that no one around me did. I felt 
tantalizingly close to this wholeness at times, usually when I was 
bleeding, but then I would return to my accustomed state of under- 
lying confusion about what it meant to be a woman. In what way was 
it different from being a man? And how did the menstrual cycle relate 
to that? I began to wonder about the effect that menstruation had on 
62 


[PDF page 75]

THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
me not only physically, now that I had realized that it was a time for 
rest and renewal, but also psychologically and spiritually. What was 
the meaning of this bleeding time in my overall development, my in- 
dividuation, and my place in society? 
During this time I repeatedly dreamed of a woman who had been 
bruised and battered. She was very sad, and I would take her in my 
arms and comfort her. In the dreams I felt shocked at the extent of the 
cruelty that had been perpetrated on her, and I also saw that she had 
somehow allowed this damage to take place. I didn’t understand why 
the damage had occurred, but I could hold her in my arms and love 
her. So I did that, night after night. Sometimes I made love to her. 
Sometimes I simply held her. Sometimes I just looked at her bruises. 
I didn’t relate to her personally at this time—TI had never been beaten 
like that. Now it is clear that she was a symbol of my wounded 
woman within, but at the time she was a visitor to my dream-life, and 
not really a part of “me.” Usually she was blonde, which made it 
harder for me to identify with her personally because I have dark hair. 
And maybe she was a visitor, as well as a representation of a part of 
myself. What was clear was that I loved her and I wanted to heal her. 
For me the wound of being female was a literal wound on the 
surface of my cervix, and it became clear to me through my dreams 
and fantasies that my work was to heal the wounded woman within. 
Doing the exercise of digging the hole in the ground had made me 
very aware of the largely unconscious negativity that I had toward so 
much of female reality. I began to look more closely than ever at what 
had created that wounding, at what “female reality” actually meant, 
and at how our society rejected or belittled so much of that. Recov- 
ering the beauty and majesty and joy of being female became my task 
in life. 
By allowing my body to be my teacher—by really listening to 
myself while I was bleeding, I began to understand what the Native 
63 


[PDF page 76]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
Americans were talking about when they stressed the potential power 
of menstruation. 
I began to look at my blood with a tinge of awe rather than fear, 
disgust, or indifference. By this time I no longer used tampons, so | 
got to look at my blood properly every month. I saw that sometimes 
it was clear and red and sometimes darker and clotted. If I really freed 
up my vision, I could see that it was full of life, full of magic, full of 
potential. I began to experience a frisson of joy when I thought about 
bleeding, about being a woman, that there was something, after all, 
extraordinarily magical and mysterious about inhabiting a female 
body. The resentment about being female that I had held in my teens 
and early twenties, the feelings that boys had a better deal, faded away 
and were replaced by a growing sense of wonder at the intricacies and 
depths and possibilities offered by the monthly cycle. 
I began to take time not only to rest but also to meditate and just 
be with myself when I had my period. I found out that it was a time 
when I was particularly able to find insight and that this insight was 
of a timeless nature. I noticed that my dreams were often very strong, 
especially toward the end of my period—clear and prophetic. I felt I 
was tapping into some ancient and vast wellspring of female wis- 
dom—simply by sitting still and listening when I was bleeding. Tak- 
ing this time out when I was bleeding created a very different 
relationship with my body. My health improved, my cervix healed, 
and gradually the bad cramps I had experienced for most of my men- 
struating life eased up. My period became a time of pleasure rather 
than pain. 
I was beginning to really love myself. Of course, you can’t make 
yourself do this, just as you can’t make yourself love another person. 
It began to happen very gradually, and many people came into my 
life who helped me see more clearly. But the revelation at the be- 
ginning was that menstruation is a source of power. This priceless 
64 


[PDF page 77]

THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
piece of information, coupled with a strong instinct I had about the 
power of the womb, transformed my deep and largely unconscious 
lack of self-respect. 
This was the information I had needed to give me the confidence 
to set about healing my own gynecological problems. It inspired me to 
see if I could feel the power of menstruation if I paid enough attention 
when I was bleeding. To think of menstruation as a source of power 
for women completely went against my conditioning, and yet I knew 
in my heart that it was true. I realized that in the dichotomy between 
what our culture teaches us, and my gut reaction of “Yes! Of course!” 
to this ancient wisdom, there was a lot of energy. When you find the 
places where a culture splits from a natural truth you have found a 
key—a way inside the diseases of the culture. I began to understand 
that the split between the wisdom and power of bleeding that I was 
perceiving and modern society’s attitudes to the womb lay at the heart 
of the subjugation and denial of female reality and experience. 
One of the gifts of being female is the access to other worlds that 
comes during the premenstruum and the time of bleeding. This limi- 
nal time opens a woman up to her psychic abilities. Euro-Western 
mechanistic culture prizes the rational and is: suspicious of the nonra- 
tional—of the intuition, the unseen realms, and the world of the spirit. 
The Christian church has encouraged us to think of ourselves as sepa- 
rate from God and in need of the intermediary of a priest in order to 
connect with spiritual realms. This emphasis on rationalism and the sev- 
erance from an autonomous relationship with Spirit has served to cut 
women off from a deep relationship with their menstrual cycle. A great 
part of women’s psychic strength is tied up with the cycles of their bod- 
ies, and if we ignore this time and fail to recognize its enormous value 
then we lose touch with the richness of female experience. 
For many women, the root of their unhappiness lies in a painful 
relationship with the processes of being female. Women are trained to 
65 


[PDF page 78]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
hide the fact that they are menstruating at all costs. Blood stains on 
clothing are a hideous embarrassment. No one ever says, “I don’t 
want to come to work or go to the party because I’ve got my period” 
unless they are feeling ill with it, and then they usually say they have 
a headache or a digestive problem. 
When the womb and menstruation are seen merely as uncom- 
fortable biological necessity, women’s self-esteem is correspondingly 
low. We are our bodies—and we can’t really love ourselves deep 
down in the bottom of our hearts if we don’t wholeheartedly love our 
bodies. And you don’t love your body if you catch yourself saying, 
“Oh no, I’ve got my period.” 
Of course, one of the reasons that we say such things is because 
our lives are planned out in advance. The altered state that menstru- 
ation can take one into is not compatible with late twentieth-century 
action-packed industrial life, with running around in the world per- 
forming our scheduled and organized tasks. Menstruation is pre- 
dictably unpredictable. You never know exactly when it is going to 
come, and sometimes it completely surprises you. Not only is it in- 
considerate of timetables and schedules, it is also messy. Hooray! We 
try to sanitize and order modern life to the degree that we run into 
danger of there being no life left in us. Periods save us from this 
doom—they are a wild and basic, raw and instinctual, bloody and 
eternal aspect of the female—and no amount of “civilization” will 
change that. My period is a monthly occurrence in my life that I have 
in common with all women who have ever lived. Women living in 
caves twenty thousand years ago, priestesses in palaces in ancient 
Egypt, seers in temples in Sumeria, all bled with the moon. The first 
woman who made fire might well have had her period at the time. 
Now that’s a thought. If menstruation is a highly creative time for 
women psychically and spiritually, who knows what gifts humankind 
has been brought by women during their menses. 
66 


[PDF page 79]

THE WOUNDED WOMAN 
The value we place on menstruation has a direct correlation with 
the value we place on ourselves as women. If we look at the attitudes 
of matrifocal, earth-centered societies, we see a very different rela- 
tionship with the menstrual cycle. As we saw in chapter 3, some cul- 
tures prize the onset of menstruation and mark it with celebration. In 
some Native American societies a menstruating woman’s dreams are 
taken very seriously for their oracular wisdom. In the Tantric tradition 
a menstruating woman is considered to be at the height of her power, 
“a true transmitter of the life force, able to act and respond with 
power and wisdom.”? 
It is the loss of contact with this innate wisdom that has led to the 
distortion of menstrual power into menstrual symptoms. 
67 


[PDF page 80]

Te a 
a yr aha - : 7 if ay Ay 
One pur pie 
Rts ype ra e ey ni ' ck Aart: Xa afin Fs 
anclaoaalia mf, wae 0 
re Tilia PSNegblor ye ai 
ee ee a ner | 
CLES wearers heh GIL iw ect ag ae * “Br 
ieinaiaerieteeimnae blew - 
ty evi? ¥ ners Oe ty at palm Li Fer Siar “Line glen . , » ieee Ge SAT ea tyro al ce we tate ee) dike = aol 
mmr ge Sf anche au Dee «hl be ©.) oa ; 
re nie wr Uae - *eibiel li : ' ve aS i —— ? 7) ¢? —* " Blea hd oe e faerie ‘i Meet 
~ 
_ - ae OR, kik er one eer ee Val ox © Ewe 
rae Grn i’ eter Calor ie ork Pyne . 
- a ee Kinet pepe eons ‘Vis bora 1 Ahpoeagt ee am 
ie ere ee ee A, - Mi WE See ‘ease: high FY ‘4 
a re ee oe ee ee ee iene 
ei Aa Gea OM poe ae bh, ry Oi eaecbon om 
Giasy She to, tor te ise ma les eet ei) ae pd, ae 
yim S ia KR pail ACPA Oar aany i tae 
a ioe 2 Ny Guile tery rea yer Rae aL ee 2) 
ee ee a intial 
Ly J ow doll Clnayaeney, Cale te OQ aia aaa eee Fat <—— - . eerie: ps i? pa sith a bata | HON = a Abu, We ~ “ 
: VTE : 
= wd mo 
é i 7 
4 
s ey ‘ iN 
1 ek 


[PDF page 81]

5 
WORKING WITH . 
MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
Anthropological literature abounds with tales of menstrual taboos 
based on fear and terror of the polluting and dangerous nature of the 
menstruating woman. When the bodily processes of women and the 
innate power of menstruation are denied and suppressed, what could 
be a highly creative energy gets twisted into something “evil.” The 
many taboos about menstruating women show a recognition of 
power—but usually with negative interpretation. If a menstruating 
woman can, as the Talmud warns, cause the death of a man by her 
mere presence,! or, as Pliny tells us, by her touch “blast the fruits of 
the field, sour wine, cloud mirrors, rust iron, and blunt the edges of 
knives,” then there can be little doubt that something pretty power- 
ful is going on. 
Even if we find these beliefs laughable in our rational age, they 
do show a primitive recognition of the power of menstruation, albeit 
69 


[PDF page 82]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
interpreted from a misogynist perspective. Although these supersti- 
tions were part of the weaponry of anti-female propaganda, and were 
used to restrict and penalize women for their natural bodily func- 
tions, at least they did acknowledge that women have power. These 
days, by ignoring menstruation and suppressing it, we have lost and 
forgotten this ancient knowledge and have come to believe that our 
monthly cycle is merely a biological phenomenon. 
J. G. Frazer notes in The Golden Bough that the same taboos are 
used for the cloths of menstruating women as for those of holy men 
and kings. 
The uncleanness, as it is called, of girls at puberty and the 
sanctity of holy men do not, to the primitive mind, differ ma- 
terially from each other. They are only different manifesta- 
tions of the same mysterious energy which, like energy in 
general, is in itself neither good nor bad, but becomes benef- 
icent or maleficent according to its application.? 
The sacredness and specialness of puberty arises from it being con- 
sidered a limen—a liminal stage in development where the individ- 
ual is neither child nor adult, a stage in which the veil between the 
worlds thins and the adolescent is vulnerable to the world of the spirit. 
In cultures with a benign worldview this vulnerability is seen as a 
blessing with the potential for wisdom and transformation. The tran- 
sition from child to adult is respected and taken seriously. It is consid- 
ered fundamental to the health of both the individual and the group. 
The teaching given to a young Native American during the adoles- 
cent vision quest is seen as useful not only for the individual but also 
for the tribe. In cultures with a negative worldview, the limen is seen 
more as a time during which both the tribe and the individual need 
protection. Both of these beliefs constitute the root of many of the 
70 


[PDF page 83]

WORKING WITH MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
puberty rituals that take the child away from the rest of the group until 
he or she is considered to have gone through the limen and emerged 
as an adult. Usually this emergence is marked by some kind of cere- 
mony. As noted in chapter 3, in societies with a benign worldview, 
the rites of puberty are greeted with joy and celebration, whereas in 
those with an emphasis on sin and evil and anxiety about bad spirits, 
the ceremony focuses on casting out demons. In patriarchal societies 
in particular, a girl’s first blood is viewed with fear, suspicion, and 
even with dread. 
Menstruation itself can be viewed as a liminal phase. The woman 
is in between: not pregnant, and not yet fertile again. She is in a sacred 
interlude during which she is shedding the past and being renewed 
before the next opportunity to create human life. 
Whether the powerful menstrual energy is used in a positive way, 
as with the Nootka and the Yurok, or whether it is uncontrolled and 
random and ruins the curing of hams, as with Portuguese villagers,* 
it is nonetheless Power. Power is strong energy, and whenever strong 
energy is not focused and utilized, it will go somewhere unpredictable 
and have an unpredictable effect. Energy is information, it will always 
surface somewhere, and if it is not allowed out through the life-force, 
the creative drive, then it will surface in the body as symptoms or in 
one’s emotional life as relationship problems.? 
If women were to access and work with the power of menstrua- 
tion instead of suppressing it, then perhaps the power that at the mo- 
ment expresses itself in the form of symptoms would be free to work 
in a more harmonious and less disturbing way. 
Symptoms arise to wake us up. They make us put our attention 
on the part of the body where they occur. We can’t escape our 
wombs if they are making pain, and we can’t ignore the menstrual 
cycle if it makes us behave differently for a week every month. 
This is part, if not the whole, of the meaning of symptoms. And it 
71 


[PDF page 84]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
is important to remember that they are symptoms—that is, the surface 
manifestation of a deeper disturbance. They are messages from the 
body. You could say they are simply messages of a hormone imbal- 
ance or a nutritional deficiency—but that begs a further set of ques- 
tions. Why is there a hormone imbalance? Why is there a nutritional 
deficiency? Many women correct their diet and take vitamins, and still 
have menstrual symptoms. 
The very aspects of menstruation that we loathe have within 
them the seeds of much information. Every time you have a period 
you are put in touch with the unconscious through your body. So a 
heavier or lighter flow, more or less pain, or other symptoms all carry 
information. Extrapolating the meaning from your period 1s an indi- 
vidual matter and involves getting to know yourself and spending 
time while you are bleeding tuning in to whatever is going on. 
PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME 
PMS should actually stand for Pre-Menstrual Strength, because that is 
what it really is: our female power turned in on itself because patri- 
archal culture fails to nurture and honor women’s reality and 
women’s gifts.° When that power is recognized and developed, it be- 
comes clear that what the premenstruum brings is emotional clarity 
and courage. 
During my twenties I was married for several years. It was not a 
successful marriage—we didn’t have enough in common to sustain a 
long-term relationship. After a couple of years I began to suffer from 
bad PMS and would become really impossible to live with for about a 
week every month. I found myself hating my husband and finding 
everything he did irritating. Sometimes I couldn’t understand why I 
was with him, I found him so loathsome. Of course, he wasn’t—he 
72 


[PDF page 85]

WORKING WITH MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
was far from loathsome—but the suppression of my unhappiness the 
rest of the month resulted in this outrageous swing into total intoler- 
ance during the premenstruum. 
He and I colluded together to see this rage as a biological quirk 
that had nothing to do with the fact that I was chronically angry with 
the lack of communication in our marriage. I simply saw it as some- 
thing that was wrong with me, and I never thought that it might have 
something useful behind it. After we divorced and I experienced the 
relief of being out ofa relationship that was profoundly wrong for me, 
I began to see the role my premenstrual anguish had taken in de- 
stroying the relationship, and a funny little thought crept in—the 
PMS was actually a helper; it had helped me to get out. 
My premenstrual anguish eased up and I began to see that it was 
indeed a friend and ally. If 1 had a lot of premenstrual symptoms it was 
a sign to check into my life—what did I really want to be doing, or 
saying, Or experiencing? 
Although PMS does involve physical symptoms, for the vast ma- 
jority of women it is the psychological symptoms that are the most 
troublesome. Such symptoms include irritability, anxiety, mood 
swings, depression, hostility, and in severe cases, suicidal or murder- 
ous feelings. Eighty percent of women experiencing PMS report that 
they have increased anxiety and irritability in the days leading up to 
the onset of bleeding. It is estimated that between one-third and one- 
half of all women between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five suffer 
from PMS, so the incidence of premenstrually related psychological 
symptoms affects millions of women.’ 
Let’s turn the normal way of looking at these symptoms on its 
head and instead of seeing them as something unpleasant that should 
be changed, seeing them as something potentially useful. What could 
be useful about being hostile? About being very emotional? About 
crying and shouting and screaming? 
WO 


[PDF page 86]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
Women are more likely to suffer from PMS if they have children 
and if they are married.® In fact, the harder it is for them to have time 
alone, the more likely it is that they will experience difficulty with 
PMS. So it may be that one of the functions of PMS is that through 
hostility, women repel those around them, and therefore are able to 
have a little time to themselves. Before I became conscious of my 
need to spend time alone during the premenstruum I often experi- 
enced a feeling of deep relief when the man in my life took himself 
out of the house rather than stay around my bad mood. It’s not quite 
that simple—I have also been very emotional when alone, and that 
leads us into the second useful aspect of PMS. 
In order to keep the peace around us, we hold in many of our 
feelings. And in order to comply with a social norm of unemotional 
behavior, we even deny those feelings to ourselves. I have no infor- 
mation on the incidence of PMS in cultures that allow and accept 
emotional expression, but it is interesting to speculate that a woman 
in Naples who is freer with her feelings during the month might have 
less need to explode premenstrually than a woman in England where 
there is a strong taboo against the outward manifestation of feelings. 
PMS has the wonderful effect of releasing feelings and opinions that 
have been locked up in the prison of conventional behavior. 
I found that when I began to pick up this pattern consciously, I 
stopped needing to have crazy fights and wild outbursts just before my 
period—what I actually wanted to do was clear up any relationship 
difficulties that remained hanging around in my life. There were 
things I needed to say to my partner, to the friend I had that difficult 
phone call with, to my mother who I felt I had not given enough time 
to, and so on. Using this time to work on unfinished material and 
then to express it can be very healing for our relationships and can 
take them into a new realm of connectedness and honesty. 
74 


[PDF page 87]

WORKING WITH MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
The cleansing aspect of menstruation also takes place at a psycho- 
logical level in terms of clarifying and resolving relationships. And not 
only in the arena of relationships with other people. It is also a per- 
fect opportunity for clearing up one’s relationship with oneself. The 
tears you didn’t cry two weeks ago because you didn’t let yourself, 
come trickling out premenstrually. One of the main causes of illness is 
unexpressed emotion that needs to be expressed somewhere, and so 
it comes out through the body. Thus PMS is a saving grace for many 
women in that the lid comes off for a day or two every month and 
suppressed emotions are released, lessening the likelihood of them 
being expressed later through a body symptom. 
It also makes sense, given the infinite wisdom and inherent bal- 
ancing capacity of our bodies, that we would have a time of cleans- 
ing and emptying before and as we bleed. It all works together, the 
body and the psyche are one, not separate. As the body releases tox- 
ins through the blood, so the psyche releases mental and emotional 
toxins through the expression of feelings. Often these feelings tend to 
manifest as anger simply because they have been blocked. Witness the 
anxious mother whose child disappears—her relief soon shifts to anger 
as the intense feelings she has been holding onto come tumbling out. 
If feelings are processed as they arise, anger is merely one of a whole 
range. The issue is whether we allow ourselves the whole range. Most 
families and most cultures have certain emotions that are less favored 
and so tend not to be expressed because the individual doesn’t iden- 
tify with them. So we find men who are sure that they are never 
afraid, women who are convinced that they never feel angry, and 
many people who think that they are never sad. One of the taboos in 
my own family when I was growing up was jealousy. My brother and 
I were discouraged from expressing jealousy at all, and consequently 
I had to learn in later life that I even felt it. Because I was convinced 
Us) 


[PDF page 88]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
that I was above such low feelings, I would suppress it the minute it 
came remotely into view. 
Having a bias against a particular emotion means that emotion is 
the one that is likely to come out when the defenses are down—dur- 
ing illness, in times of stress, and to varying degrees, in the premen- 
struum. This is why we don’t recognize ourselves and instead say, “I 
turn into a monster just before my period,” and seek a physiological 
reason and a physical remedy. Often there is a physiological reason, 
and diet and other remedies can be very helpful, but the mind and the 
body are not separate, and working at a psychological level can do 
wonders for the health of the whole organism. 
Cleansing emotionally always means expression of some type 
(which does not necessarily involve interaction with others). Many 
women do this unconsciously because the normal controls fail to op- 
erate when they are menstruating. Those who do not may be more 
likely to break down after childbirth or at menopause (or at other 
times of change and stress), when the lid can no longer be kept on the 
accumulated tensions of the years. 
The connection between the womb and strong outbursts of emo- 
tion has long been known. The root of our word hysteria is the Greek 
hustera, meaning “womb.” Becoming conscious of the role of men- 
struation in opening us to the expression of emotion allows us to re- 
spect the process and work with it, rather than deny it and then have 
the feelings erupt violently and painfully in ways that can be damag- 
ing to ourselves and to our relationships. 
I have found that my menstrual symptoms have abated consider- 
ably since I started paying attention to my menstrual cycle. I still oc- 
casionally get cramps, but nothing like the crippling, debilitating pain 
that I used to get. I never take a pain-killer. Lying down with a hot 
water-bottle and entering a relaxed and meditative state of mind eases 
any discomfort, and it passes quickly. Likewise I still get some mild 
76 


[PDF page 89]

WORKING WITH MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
premenstrual symptoms: a little water retention that I experience as 
slight breast tenderness, and a tendency to moodiness—depression and 
elation. This moodiness is actually a sign of the emotional richness of 
the premenstruum. One is alive to the full range of one’s feeling life, 
and within that contact with the breadth and depth of the emotions 
is the potential for great creativity. 
I find that any symptoms I do experience are a great source of in- 
sight into emotional issues that I need to pay attention to. During a 
time when | went through a good deal of emotional upheaval I found 
that my periods were a rich time for processing the different feelings 
that naturally arose during a time of instability and rapid change. Since 
then I have been learning to trust the process enough to allow these 
feelings their space when they come up, and during times of change 
and loss it is not unusual for me to have a spate of weeping at some 
point during the first day or two of my bleeding. Afterward I feel 
lightened, and I know that this emotional release is a part of the gift of 
the moon-time. 
Change always brings loss as well as the excitement of the new. It 
is important to allow grief its place in one’s life and not skate over it. 
Grief lays the mineral deposits in the psyche that we later mine—it is 
part of the foundation of our wisdom. Most people growing up in the 
Western world are trained to suppress grief—we have no useful ritu- 
als for the dead, no mourning period, no keening. We have tried to 
erase grief from our emotional repertoire and have substituted the ex- 
pectation of happiness in its place as if to feel grief were somehow a 
failing and to always be happy were the goal of a well-spent life. But 
that type of happiness is merely bland. It is the so-called happiness of 
a TV dinner, a beige sofa, muzak piped into supermarkets. True hap- 
piness is a joy that wells up from inside the being and is only partly re- 
lated to external events, and it cannot thrive unless all of its 
companions—grief and rage and disappointment—are allowed their 
7 


[PDF page 90]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
expression too. Allowing oneself a wide range of emotional expres- 
sion is the way to be whole. 
So women are lucky in this regard, because their period opens 
them up to their emotional life and makes it harder for them to sup- 
press their feelings. It is the attempt to override this natural mecha- 
nism that creates so much disharmony at menstruation and that lies 
behind many of the symptoms that women endure. 
PMS and Individuation 
It is interesting that the symptoms of PMS are most severe in women 
in their thirties and forties.? There are many possible explanations for 
this. An intriguing possibility is its relationship to individuation. The 
process of individuation gets going in most people in their thirties and 
forties, after they have learned to survive in the primary culture. Their 
psychic energy is then freed up to develop a true individuality. If there 
is not enough opportunity for this, then the symptoms of “mid-life 
crisis” may emerge, and one of the ways this manifests is in a desire to 
get away from the confines of everyday life. 
This is not dissimilar to the panic and anxiety and overwhelming 
feelings of PMS. It may be that PMS is a way of allowing a woman 
to have her individual time for inner work and self-exploration. It 
may also be a signal from her body-mind that it requires some atten- 
tion that it is not getting in the busy round of daily life. 
MENSTRUATION AND BODY AWARENESS 
Menstrual pain has several functions—one of the most obvious is that 
it shifts our attention to our bodies. It increases our experience of our 
78 


[PDF page 91]

WORKING WITH MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
bodies and awakens the ability to be aware of the different parts of the 
body and of bodily sensations. Body consciousness is an undervalued 
skill in this culture. We are trained in school to think and see and hear— 
but rarely are we encouraged to feel, with our emotions or our bodies. 
As a culture we value stoicism and the overriding of the body. We 
have schedules, appointments, and timetables that are based on indus- 
trial efficiency rather than the moment-to-moment needs of the body. 
We wait until the end of the meeting to empty our bladders, until the 
end of the day to eat our main meal. We go to work when we have 
colds, when we have menstrual cramps, when we have headaches. 
“Not feeling like it” is seen as a pretty lame excuse. 
One of the skills of being a woman lies in being very aware of 
moment-to-moment bodily needs. Being deeply in touch with her 
body enables a woman to best nurture her unborn and nursing chil- 
dren. A woman needs to be able to know, and to say, “I need this type 
of food Now,” “I need to rest Now,” “I need to drink Now.” 
The cyclical physiology of women means that their nutritional 
and rest requirements fluctuate during the month far more than a 
man’s in the equivalent time period. She cannot establish a norm and 
stick to it come what may. She is a cyclical being, with an ebb and 
flow of energy. 
Getting in touch with that rhythm and finding ways to honor it 
is a challenge in today’s world. Menstrual symptoms pull us back in 
touch with ourselves. When we have cramps we can’t ignore the fact 
that we are menstruating, and when the pain is really bad it’s hard to 
focus on anything other than the body part that is screaming. 
This might sound a bit odd, but this is actually another of the 
benefits of menstruation. Menstrual symptoms, especially pain, en- 
courage body consciousness by forcing one to experience physical 
sensations. Women in later life frequently have an easier time than 
79 


[PDF page 92]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
men in coping with their bodies, with illness, aging, and pain. One of 
the reasons may be that they have more of a relationship with their 
bodies—they are forced into their bodies by the experience of men- 
struation and child-bearing. So when their bodies begin to change 
through the aging process, they are more in touch and psychologically 
more accustomed to the fact that bodies change. In many tribes, for 
example among the Aborigines of Australia, puberty rituals for boys 
focus on the endurance of pain, whereas this is not considered neces- 
sary for girls because nature itself initiates them into their bodies, the 
experience of physical pain, and the mysteries of life. 
There is a connection between body awareness and intuition. We 
talk of having “gut feelings” that give us intuitive information. We 
say, “I knew it wouldn’t work, it just didn’t feel right.” Being in touch 
with our bodies gives us the opportunity to access information that is 
nonrational—things that we ordinarily couldn’t have known. 
MENSTRUAL PAIN 
Menstrual cramping is often idiopathic—that is, arising from no 
known organic dysfunction. It is simply a part of menstruation and, in 
Western medical opinion, doesn’t mean that there is anything wrong 
with the woman. Most women have experienced menstrual pain and 
many have it every month. 
In Chinese medicine, menstrual cramps are seen as always being 
indicative of an imbalance that could be corrected by changes in 
lifestyle and diet, and/or by taking herbs and having acupuncture. 
Catching cold is seen as a particular danger for the womb, and that is 
one of the reasons why heat is often relieving for cramps. The Chinese 
also recognize that emotional difficulties can give rise to menstrual 
cramps. Western medicine does not differentiate menstrual pain to this 
80 


[PDF page 93]

WORKING WITH MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
extent and generally prescribes pain-killers only, unless symptoms are 
severe. Psychologists have begun to develop ways of using psycho- 
therapy to cure body symptoms such as cramps.!° Bodywork, such as 
massage, can also be very helpful during an attack, and certain yoga 
poses are also very effective. 
During one menstrual period, I had a lot of pain for several hours 
in the middle of the first night of bleeding. I knew it wasn’t caused by 
a physical problem. When I let go of hating it and wishing it would go 
away and of giving myself a hard time for having it in the first place 
(and feeling guilty because I’m supposed to be so tuned in to my pe- 
riods now that it’s all bliss and certainly not painful . . . ha!), I realized 
that it was pain, that I hurt, and that relief came when I consciously 
picked up on the feeling of hurt and began to wail and moan. I let all 
the times when I had felt hurt emotionally in recent weeks come up, 
and I expressed the hurt by yelling and moaning in my bed. I began to 
feel better and after acknowledging to myself what it was that I was 
hurt about and telling myself that it was okay for me to be sensitive 
and have feelings, I fell asleep. 
My period demands emotional honesty and clarity from me. This 
includes clearing up the last month’s emotional difficulties. We always 
have relationship issues in our lives, and there are always instances oc- 
curring when we are hurt or slighted in some way. Sometimes these 
are well within the bounds that we can handle and our resiliency pre- 
vents wounds from going deep. But there are times when we do feel 
vulnerable. Usually we protect ourselves from this by deciding that it 
doesn’t really matter, we don’t care anyway, and it’s no good going 
through life being so sensitive. 
But the point is that there is a part of us that does care, that cares 
very deeply about our own pain and the pain of others. And if we 
block off from our own pain then ultimately we block off from the 
pain of others. 
81 


[PDF page 94]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
One of the reasons menstrual pain arises is to put us in touch with 
our feelings of being hurt, and by really expressing it we can release 
it by acknowledging it. Life is a process of gaining self-knowledge. 
Symptoms arise to give us information. If you don’t express your pain 
verbally or in some other conscious and creative way then it may be 
expressed unconsciously through the body as pain. Menstruation is a 
wonderful opportunity for women to process hurt feelings, rage, and 
frustration. 
Menstrual pain can be really awful. As with labor pains, it is ob- 
scuring reality to imagine that it doesn’t really hurt; sometimes, for 
some women, the pain that comes with menstruation has an excruci- 
ating and seemingly unbearable intensity. 
There is a similarity between the pain of labor and the pain of 
menstruation—both are caused by uterine contractions (unless there is 
a physical problem causing the menstrual pain, such as endometriosis). 
When a woman menstruates she is laboring to give birth to herself. 
Menstruation is the rebirth of the woman; it occurs instead of the 
onset of pregnancy and means that she 1s free, for the next month at 
least, of sharing her body with another—free of the responsibility of 
motherhood and the weight (literally) of the unborn child. 
PHYSIGAL-RENEWAL 
Many women, when left to their own devices, report that they like to 
take it easy on the first day or two of their periods.'! The natural in- 
clination to rest and be still during menstruation is an opportunity for 
physical renewal. Physically, bleeding is a form of elimination and is 
therefore a cleansing for the body. Through cleansing and retreat the 
woman becomes revitalized. The debilitating symptoms that arise at 
the time of menstruation might in some cases be a message from the 
82 


[PDF page 95]

WORKING WITH MENSTRUAL SYMPTOMS 
body to stop! Lie down and rest and listen to the body wisdom that is 
trying to come through you. Let your body take this natural break in 
the month to rest and rebuild. We need to relearn the ancient knowl- 
edge that menstruation is an important juncture in the month. It is a 
built-in time for rest, retreat, and renewal. 
Often our long-term, deep healing comes through the very sim- 
ple—more rest, more love, doing the work we love—going back to 
basics. It is this level of healing that I address in this book. What have 
I found out about the healing of the womb? That women want to be 
alone, to be quiet and undisturbed, to rest and retreat for at least a few 
hours while they are bleeding and often for a day or two before the 
bleeding starts. That’s all—it is really very simple. We need to be sup- 
ported in following the wisdom of the body, which slows down and 
beckons us to focus internally during the bleeding time. We need not 
to work, not to relate, not to be under any pressure to be anything 
other than ourselves. We need to allow the natural wisdom and cre- 
ativity to emerge in this quiet space in the month, to emerge in its 
own time, in its own way. The wisdom of women is linked to the 
womb and the power of the womb is the power of cycles and of ges- 
tation. Allowing time, allowing emptiness, allowing not-doing—these 
are all keys to health for women. 
It’s very healthy to shed a skin—it allows the detritus of the past 
to be sloughed off, and then the new, clean smooth skin shows up on 
the surface and we are renewed. The blood that was a part of us is 
now gone, leaving the womb cleaned out and ready for the next 
month. This cycle is beneficial to our overall health. A friend of mine 
once said that he always thought that women lived longer than men 
because they menstruate, and some tribes share this belief. 
Developing a love for and a connection with the power of men- 
struation also means developing a love for and connection with the 
process. It won’t work if the relationship you have with your bleeding 
83 


[PDF page 96]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
is a theoretical one. It has to be actualized in terms of behavior in order 
for the power to begin manifesting in a positive way. The power back- 
fires on us if we don’t honor our bleeding and develop a conscious re- 
lationship with it, if we don’t pick up the messages our bodies send us. 
Cultivating a loving attitude toward your whole cycle is very impor- 
tant—this attitude is the metaskill behind menstruating with awareness. 
At times, and especially at the beginning, negative feelings will 
surface and want to be expressed. Don’t hold back on them. You may 
need to scream with rage at the inconvenience of it, at the messiness, 
at the pain. But keep behind that an attitude of loving yourself, loving 
your body, loving the reality of being female, and gradually the bal- 
ance will begin to shift. It is fundamental in developing the skills of 
being a woman to trust the process that is inherent within us and that 
has been denied us because we have been indoctrinated into a male 
reality. 
84 


[PDF page 97]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
Women give, and in order to give they have to take in. They do this 
by first emptying and cleansing, and then renewing their connection 
to the source. This is the function of menstruation. 
About three years after I began taking menstruation seriously and 
changing my behavior during my periods (which coincided with a 
time of emotional upheaval, spiritual searching, psychological work, 
and shamanic practice), I had an experience that gave me some crucial 
information about the nature of menstrual traditions in ancient ma- 
trifocal societies. 
It was part of a transformation of my life that had begun a year 
earlier with a letting go of virtually everything I owned and connected 
with, including my career, my home, and my country of origin. I felt 
driven by some huge force to clear myself of everything that con- 
tributed to my conditioned view of life and of myself. 
85 


[PDF page 98]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
I then entered a period of bliss. I was in love with everyone and 
everything and experienced life as an ever-opening kaleidoscope of 
magic and beauty. I had many wonderful experiences of being at-one 
with everything, of merging with my lover totally, of experiencing 
the universe as pure love. 
After six months of this I entered the territory of the shadow—l 
became very sick while traveling in Nepal, and along with the illness 
came a descent into a deep depression. I was physically blasted by the 
illness and stayed in bed at first and then chiefly indoors and in a safe 
place for several months. I was beset by intense and uncontrollable 
fear and shaken to the core by the whole experience. Several times I 
completely lost faith in the flow of my life and in my spiritual con- 
nection. I felt abandoned and close to destroyed—and by what? I 
hadn’t a clue. The ideas that I was holding onto about who I was and 
was not were preventing me from really being myself. I knew that I 
wanted to write, that it was vitally important for me to allow my cre- 
ativity to have expression, but I lacked confidence, and was fighting 
demons of self-criticism and distrust. 
The recovery period was slow. When feeling optimistic I per- 
ceived the illness as a major purification, and it felt as if my body had 
been rewired in order to handle a new frequency of energy. When 
feeling that I would never fully recover (my energy level was unpre- 
dictable for a year after the initial onslaught), I worried that my ner- 
vous system had been permanently damaged and feared for the health 
of my heart, which raced at the slightest opportunity. 
While I was putting myself back together, feeling like a newborn 
puppy on wobbly legs and gradually finding that I could cope with 
the world again, I had, out of the blue, the strongest experience of the 
whole transformation period. 
I awoke at about 4 A.M. from a dream that propelled me into a se- 
ries of experiences of a woman named Hathor living in Ancient 
86 


[PDF page 99]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
Egypt. I was used to having past-life experiences, but this had a dif- 
ferent quality. It was as if I was allowed to enter Hathor’s reality and 
as if she and I were (and are) intimately and intricately and eternally 
connected, although we are also clearly different people. She is star- 
tlingly alive to me, and as a result of “feeling” her, I no longer expe- 
rience time in only a linear framework. 
Hathor lived (or lives) at a time when patriarchal ideas were just 
beginning, a time when the Goddess was still revered, a time when 
women had their own temples and their own rituals, a time when 
women’s wisdom was respected and encouraged. 
I was astonished by the experience of making this connection 
with her but also settled by it. I began to calm down, to have a sense 
of my direction, and, at last, to take my writing seriously. I began a di- 
alogue with her that I usually wrote down as it came through, and one 
day, several months later, I asked her what the women of her time did 
when they menstruated. 
When a woman felt her time coming, she would bake 
food for the family, put some in a bag for herself, and then 
walk up to the moon house. This house was outside the town 
on the top of a hillside that had on one side been eroded into 
a cliff by the river. The house overlooked the town to the 
north, the river to the east, and the gentle slope of the hills to 
the west, and then the desert beyond and behind, on the far 
side of the fertile plain. 
During the walk up the hillside the woman would begin 
to let go of her attachment to her family and her life and its 
obligations down in the town. She would already be entering 
the dreaminess of her moon-time when she arrived at the top 
of the hill and walked down the path through the simple gar- 
den. She was greeted by the housekeeper, an older woman 
87 


[PDF page 100]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
past menstruating age who kept the hearth of the house. She 
would give the housekeeper a small amount of money and go 
inside and take a bed in the dormitory. 
She would speak quiet words of greeting to the other 
women, but this was not a time for gossip or chat, or even se- 
rious talk. This was a time to go inside, to be alone, even 
when amidst others. Occasionally, when a woman felt partic- 
ularly moved to seek the wisdom within, or in need of great 
cleansing, she would go off alone into the desert for her 
moon. 
The moon house was very simple. One large room full of 
beds, a shrine room for contemplation, and a platform over- 
looking the river on which they ate the simple meals they had 
brought with them. From the bedroom the windows faced 
east and had beautiful views of the river and of the mountains 
beyond. There were no windows to the north and west and 
therefore no view of the town or the fields. The walls were 
built of a light-colored stone, and the beds were spaced well 
apart from each other. The shrine room was dark, in the cen- 
ter of the house, and in it was a statue of Isis and black cush- 
ions on which to comfortably sit. 
The atmosphere in the house was restful, peaceful, un- 
cluttered. A place to let go. Often women would be heard 
weeping to themselves, or some other release. This was ac- 
cepted as part of the moon and was not interfered with in any 
way by the other women. If a woman became particularly 
distressed she could go to the housekeeper, but it was taboo 
to disturb others. Each respected the others’ going inside, a 
time when women had no responsibility to care for others— 
the necessary balance to the role of care giver. 
88 


[PDF page 101]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
Six months later, while meditating on the first day of my period, 
I found myself in a deep trance in which I received the following ad- 
vice, entitled “Guidelines for Menstruating Women”: 
Stay still inside and let the blood flow out. 
See your womb as an opening flower, full of fierce pink light, 
sending out a special sweet rosy energy into the world, 
which cleans and nourishes. 
Let the beauty blood spill onto the earth. 
Trust the wisdom of the body’s cycle. Honor it. Go with 
what your body wants to do. 
Take gentle peaceful exercise in quiet places. Listen to slow 
flowing water, the tinkle of a fountain in a stone-flagged 
square. 
Take a slow look and a slow movement. Turn your head gently. 
Stroke yourself. Let all your movements be soft and serene. 
Speak with gentleness. No fights. 
Eat simple food: grains and vegetables and broth. Nothing 
too rich or sweet or milky. 
Drink pure water, savoring the taste and clearness. 
Go inside, deep inside, and allow any murkiness to be seen 
and to flow out. A time of clearing out and of taking in. 
Be alert to information for the coming month. 
Relax. Be soft. Slow down. 
Open your womb, your thighs, your knees, your ankles, your 
toes. Open your heart. By opening, let go, let the blood 
flow. 
This advice profoundly affected me and sent me deeper into my 
experience of the menstrual mysteries. I found that following these 
89 


[PDF page 102]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
guidelines took me into my center and put me in touch with a well- 
spring of wisdom and knowledge. This affirmation of the concept that 
menstruation is a time of power gave me the confidence to question 
more intently our contemporary attitudes, not only to menstruation, 
but to cycles in general. 
Feeling this new sense of personal power and wholeness set me 
thinking about the nature of late twentieth-century life and how dif- 
ficult it is for us to live in such a centered and healing way, how hard 
it is for us to honor the natural cycles of our bodies, and just how far 
we have gone from the wisdom of these ancient voices. 
MENSTRUATION AS SABBATH 
The ancient Babylonian word for Sabbath, sabbatu, comes from Sa- 
bat, and means heart-rest. In Babylon it was a day of rest, when the 
goddess Ishtar was said to be menstruating. Travel, work, and eating 
cooked food were prohibited for everyone on this day—as they were 
for menstruating women in many cultures.! Cuneiform tablets of the 
fourth dynasty of Ur, dating from the third millennium B.C.E., tell us 
that in Sumer the times of the new moon and the full moon were de- 
voted to ritual observance. Likewise, the Jewish sabbath originally oc- 
curred at the new moon and full moon; it was later extended to each 
quarter of the moon.* These far-distant days of rest, linked to the 
moon and to menstruation, were the origin of the modern Jewish sab- 
bath and Christian Sunday. 
These days few people take even one day a month to really rest. 
In general, Euro-Western culture is obsessed with the Doing mode of 
living. We only value ourselves if we are doing something, and we 
think that people who don’t do very much are less valid members of 
society. We are oriented toward productivity and the accumulation of 
90 


[PDF page 103]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
wealth and possessions rather than toward the accumulation of wis- 
dom, spiritual strength, and self-knowledge. 
This continual doing does not lead to happiness or well-being, 
and we all know the relief of being on holiday and not having to Do 
anything. Now, obviously, it would be unbalancing in the other di- 
rection if we all laid down our tools and decided to just Be, but maybe 
we could use a little bit more stillness and unpressured hanging-out 
times in our lives, and I don’t mean sitting in front of the television 
watching people kill each other and cheat on their spouses. I’m think- 
ing more of sitting in front of a tree, or a lake, or the sea, and just 
Being. 
There was a good deal of value in the old idea of the Sabbath— 
empty time with no labor, devoted to prayer and contemplation. As 
the industrial age built up steam, powered by the Protestant work 
ethic, the Sabbath fell out of favor and the old taboos against work- 
ing on one day of the week disappeared. This can only be adding to 
the stress and pressure of modern life. Our bodies and our minds need 
to take time out, they need a periodic rest, and our spirits need to be 
nurtured—they need some time devoted purely to the spiritual life. 
The lack of Sabbath may be why so many people get colds and flu— 
that is the only way they can have a Sabbath, a rest from continual 
Doing. 
In many parts of America, the only way you can tell it’s Sunday 
is that the beaches are more crowded, the Sunday paper is on sale, and 
there is less traffic in the downtown areas. Other than that, everything 
is the same. All the shops are open, and most services are available. 
And the television never sleeps. 
If you are always racing about, doing this and that, always running 
behind yourself, when do you have time to really feel your feelings? 
When do you have time to reflect upon why you reacted so strongly 
when a colleague said he hated animals in the house, why your husband 
oh. 


[PDF page 104]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
is annoying you so much at the moment, why you hate wearing red, 
why the thought of your mother coming over for lunch fills you with 
dread. You might have quick ideas about what these things mean, you 
may just push them aside and keep running, but you won’t under- 
stand them and heal the difficulties in your life if you don’t have some 
quiet time. 
A woman’s moon-time is the obvious time in her cycle to take a 
break from Doing and to just sit and be, to sit and bleed. It is a nat- 
ural time for opening to the spiritual realms, and for doing the work 
of knowing and understanding the self that can only happen in empty, 
still, quiet time. 
In the Jewish tradition, the first day of each month (which would 
have been the day of the new moon before we went to the solar cal- 
endar, traditionally the time of menstruation) is a women’s holiday, 
called Rosh Chodesh (head of the month). This holiday is being re- 
claimed by some Jewish women. This was a ritualized acceptance of 
the desire of women to have a break when they are bleeding. 
Peaceful time is very useful for relationship problems, and sitting 
quietly for a few hours can do wonders for restoring perspective. 
Many squabbles and fights arise from our over-stimulated adrenal 
glands, which are for many people continually fired up on all cylin- 
ders, fighting through the traffic to get to work, dealing with work 
pressures and deadlines, coping with a family as well as a job—and 
then the television is on all evening screaming away at you, and there 
is No Peace. 
We have become so used to this pressurized existence in the 
Euro-Western world that many people have forgotten how to sit still. 
It seems boring because we have grown accustomed to continual ex- 
ternal stimulus. But there is an inner life as well as an outer life, and 
that inner life, the life of the psyche, is very precious and is the well- 
spring of our creativity, of our gift to the world. Ultimately we may 
92 


[PDF page 105]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
not give anything of great value without nurturing this inner life. And 
it needs quiet time to grow and develop. 
We can relearn how to be in the rhythm of stillness again—we 
knew how to once, when we were babies and small children and 
went from bursts of rapid activity to moments of stillness and sleep and 
then back into activity again. We need to give ourselves time: time to 
absorb change, time to let ourselves take in everything around us— 
not taking life as a whistle-stop tour in which we have to grab as 
much as we can before we are thrown off the train. We have to give 
ourselves time to get in touch with stillness again, by practicing sitting 
still. Many people have the experience of going on holiday and not 
knowing what to do with themselves for the first few days with all 
that open and unstructured time. And then after three or four days 
they remember how to just be, and by the time they are really loving 
it it’s time to come home again. If we had more time like this in the 
regular routine, perhaps life would become less of a pressure and more 
of a pleasure. 
By taking menstruation as the natural time for stillness and quiet 
in a woman’s life we can begin to relearn the rhythm of sitting in 
peace with ourselves, and then we can begin to reap the benefits of a 
closer relationship with our inner beings. 
Menstruation can be a deeply grounding and centering time in 
which a woman is naturally put directly in touch with her center of 
gravity—her womb. Thus there is actually a greater capacity for still- 
ness at this time—for listening, for receiving from the cosmos. The 
awareness that is available to us during menstruation cannot come into 
our consciousness if we are rushing about fulfilling the exterior de- 
mands of our everyday lives. 
Sitting still and being centered are prerequisites in all spiritual tra- 
ditions for the development of wisdom. Menstruation is a natural time 
for women to meditate and make contact with the divine, within and 
93 


[PDF page 106]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
without. When the body is still the mind also becomes still and then 
the spiritual wisdom that exists at a deeper level of consciousness is 
free to come to the surface of awareness. 
FINDING OUT WHO YOU REALLY ARE 
AND WHAT YOU REALLY WANT 
Menstruation is a door into oneself. Traditionally, girls entering pu- 
berty knew to watch for a vision of their future when they had their 
first period. It was recognized that menarche is a door into adulthood, 
where visions of one’s life are available so that correct choices can be 
made in order to follow one’s heart’s desire and fulfill one’s destiny 
and deepest dream. Likewise, the monthly bleeding is a doorway into 
the forthcoming month, and sometimes, when the energy is very 
strong, into a longer period of one’s life. 
By tuning in to yourself during bleeding and allowing for the ex- 
istence of this gateway, you allow information in the psyche to 
emerge into consciousness—information about what you truly want 
and need. This is so valuable, and yet it is an ability of ours that we 
tend to dismiss. We go to career counselors and psychotherapists for 
the very information that we alone possess. A skilled helper will work 
to enable you to unravel the knotted skein of desire within you—but 
it 1s also possible to do this alone by connecting with your body 
rhythms in a deep way. 
When you have your period, if you allow yourself some quiet 
time, you will find that ideas and knowledge and information will 
begin to come to you. It will usually come in the form of a knowing, 
that can slip away if not caught and held onto. Watch out in the early 
morning when you first wake up. There is often juicy information 
94 


[PDF page 107]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
around then. Keep paper and a pen next to your bed to jot ideas 
down. 
You may also.find that you begin to get information about other 
people coming in. My experience has been that in opening up to the 
menstrual mysteries, I have also opened up to an ability to be intuitive 
in a way that appears to take me into a group mind—a place where 
information about anyone and anything is available to anyone with 
the psychic awareness to pick it up. This is close to, and maybe the 
same as, what is today called channeling. 
From what I have read about cultures in which the time of men- 
struation was regarded as a time of power for women, I suspect that 
women have a particularly strong capacity to enter this level of uni- 
versal information. Either this capacity is strongest during menstrua- 
tion, or menstruation is the best time to develop this awareness, 
perhaps because then the body and mind are relatively still. It may be 
that anyone who enters contemplative mode long enough would 
begin to manifest this ability to “channel,” and that it is simply be- 
cause menstruation offers such a perfect opportunity to be still and 
within that it produces this effect. However, there is such a dominant 
archetype of the medium as female in today’s culture, that for now, at 
any rate, it appears that mediumistic abilities are more the domain of 
women than of men. 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF WISDOM IN WOMEN 
A woman who uses her time of bleeding to develop her inner life, and 
therefore her self-knowledge, begins, over time, to become wise. Life 
is a teacher of wisdom, and it is life experienced with awareness that 
creates wisdom in the elderly. But children can also be wise. I think 
95 


[PDF page 108]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
there is a level of awareness that is available to all humans that is sim- 
ply wise, and I believe one can foster an ability to enter that level. 
One of the keys to this seems to be to really know oneself in the mo- 
ment, and to act without inhibition—this is why children are more 
open to wisdom than most adults. We develop inhibitions for many 
reasons, some of them good ones. 
Living is, in part, a quest to understand how to be oneself, a truly 
differentiated individual, within a society that demands certain inhi- 
bitions in order to maintain harmony in the whole. Navigating 
through this terrain of personal desire versus collective demand is the 
task of the adult, and the ideal is for the mature years to be an expres- 
sion of all that is best about both: to be a developed individual—to 
“know thyself”—and at the same time to be a worthy citizen of the 
world who is able to give wisdom and knowledge back into the soup 
of the collective. 
MENOPAUSE AND THE“ARGCHETYPE 
OF THE CRONE 
In later life the urgency of fulfilling personal desire decreases. For men 
and women, changes in hormones and the completion of certain life 
tasks, such as raising a family and becoming established in the world, 
allow the desire nature to subside. Without the monthly surge and 
wane in hormones a woman’s sexual longing and desire to reproduce 
calm down, and the desire mechanism in general becomes less stri- 
dent. As a society we need post-menopausal women whose main at- 
tention is no longer focused on getting what they want but has moved 
on toward giving the accumulated wisdom of the years back to the 
world. 
96 


[PDF page 109]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
The Celts said that a post-menopausal woman was wise because 
she now kept the precious blood within her—I speculate that a post- 
menopausal woman is wise because she has menstruated for thirty or 
forty years, and during that time she was a gatherer of wisdom. Now, 
having gathered it in, she sits on it and lets it build, fortified by the ex- 
perience of her lifetime. A lifetime of garnering wisdom every month 
leads to a wise old age. The perpetual round of the menstrual cycle 
tunes a woman in to the pulse of the earth and the rays of the moon. 
It gives her the knowing, in her body, of the cyclical nature of all life. 
Now that women can realistically expect to live for at least twenty to 
thirty years past menopause, as a culture we have a potentially vast re- 
source of wise women, if we would only use it. 
The current obsession with staving off menopause through the 
use of hormone replacement therapy misses the point that there is an 
inherent value in ceasing to menstruate. I wonder if women need to 
prolong their menstrual experience because they never really had it— 
because they spent their periods pretending that nothing was happen- 
ing. Perhaps the desire to continue to bleed is actually an unconscious 
attempt to complete that part of life. 
Menopausal women speak of their sense of loss of a cycle never 
properly lived. Their periods end and then they realize, too late, what 
a gift was held in their monthly bleeding. As with any grief, it is the 
unacknowledged and unlived aspect that is often the most painful. 
When someone dies with whom you have a lot of unresolved or un- 
expressed feelings, things you wanted to say but didn’t, love or anger 
never clearly expressed, there is often a very deep pain. Likewise with 
menstruation—it is the unacknowledged part of it that causes the 
most painful aspect of the grief of menopause. If you have given your- 
self time to enjoy bleeding and to reap the benefits of conscious men- 
struation, then the menopause becomes more a welcomed passage 
07, 


[PDF page 110]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
than the loss of a womanhood you never really had. This is, in part, 
why women crave their youthfulness in contemporary Euro-Western 
culture and why they spend billions of dollars to avoid looking like 
who they really are—post-menopausal women. 
The other and perhaps stronger reason for this, is that the crone 
is not valued in Euro-Western society. In traditional Breton weddings 
the three phases of the bride’s life were celebrated—she was imper- 
sonated first by a little girl, then by the mistress of the home, and by an 
old grandmother. In modern weddings we still have the flower girl or 
bridesmaid, and the matron-of-honor, but the crone figure is no 
longer present. 
We see the maiden everywhere—she is the archetype of female 
splendor paraded across magazines and movie screens. The mother has 
some value and is even, in a limited aspect, revered in contemporary 
religion. But the crone appears nowhere. She is the hidden archetype 
of this culture, all her power hidden in the underbelly of our lives. A 
culture that reveres youth over the wisdom of age is an immature cul- 
ture, and it is therefore no wonder that our supposedly civilized soci- 
ety is not in the least bit mature, but is in fact riddled with addictions, 
with the widespread misuse of resources, and with endemic violence 
toward women and children. 
ALTERED STATES OF CONSCIOUSNESS 
For women involved in spiritual practice and creative work, men- 
struation gives an opportunity for increased access to nonordinary 
states of awareness. Many women experience difficulty in thinking in 
a focused way during or just before their periods (as they also do after 
giving birth, often for several months). The energy that is usually 
98 


[PDF page 111]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
available for focused thought is diverted into other areas, and the 
woman experiences a more diffuse state of awareness. 
This is the state in which creative insights can sneak in, when lat- 
eral thinking is easiest, when we can let go of our accustomed per- 
ceptions and attitudes. Input from other dimensions is more readily 
available. Activities of a visionary and intuitive nature have added en- 
ergy and possibility at this time—dreaming, receiving information 
about the coming month, gaining awareness of psychological patterns, 
receiving teachings from spiritual guides, experiencing psychic con- 
nections with others. I have had many experiences of prophetic 
dreams during menstruation. I have found that the last couple of days 
of my period tend to be the strongest for precognition. It seems that 
the premenstruum and the first couple of days are mainly occupied 
with cleansing and processing, and then the way is open to receive 
wisdom and insight. Just as at menarche girls seek visions for their 
adult lives, so one can look for information about the coming month 
during one’s period. 
Monica Sj66 says that “shamanism, an ecstatic lunar technology, 
relies on the natural psychic descent into body-consciousness that 
menstruation brings each month to women.”4 The descent of the 
shaman is so similar to the monthly descent of the woman into herself, 
that it seems likely that the moon-time is a natural opportunity to do 
shamanic practices and seek altered states of consciousness. “At men- 
struation, when the body passes its blood-food, a woman often feels 
an ingathering of her energy and feelings to a deeper center below the 
threshold of consciousness.” The shamanic journey may have its ori- 
gins in the psychic journeys of menstruating women; Alaskan and 
Siberian shamans talk of going to the moon. 
The death and rebirth motif of menstruation parallels shamanic 
experience. The feeling of death at the onset of menstruation; the 
oo 


[PDF page 112]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
sense, particularly during the premenstruum, of going down into the 
mire and the darkness of oneself—this descent is an essential part of 
shamanic transformation. The shaman descends, faces death, and 
through courage and determination, returns to his or her people with 
special gifts of healing and wisdom. 
The fear of death in our nonspiritual culture is linked to the de- 
nial of menstruation. In pre-industrial society women menstruated to- 
gether around the time of the new moon. Moon-dark is a two-day 
period of time before the new moon when there is no moonlight at 
all. Before we see the light of the new moon we experience a tem- 
porary death, a darkness. Menstruation coincides with this—it marks 
the death of a potential life. It is a release of the layers built up during 
the month, the layers of physical blood, and also the psychic debris 
and emotional clutter of the previous four weeks. 
Like the shaman, the menstruating woman has been seen as some- 
how mysteriously closer to the sacred aspect of nature than other 
human beings. In the Indian cult of Shakti-worshipers the yoni and its 
red flow are prized and adored. “In Shaktism the menstrual taboo is 
broken down and the menstrual fluid is regarded as sacred and be- 
comes the object of veneration. A menstruating woman is placed in 
a special category during ritual practice. Her energy at this time is said 
to be different in quality, and the rhythm that occurs in her body ap- 
pears to be related in a mysterious way to the processes of nature. . . . 
The monthly efflorescence of woman in her cycle in rhythm with the 
lunar cycle creates a body consciousness which is related to the 
processes of the universe.”® 
Imagine how it would be if we were raised to think of our blood 
as divine, as magical, as precious. Experiencing the beauty and intense 
spirituality of bleeding can dramatically change a woman’; relationship 
with herself. While meditating during my period I have seen my 
100 


[PDF page 113]

THE SABBATH OF WOMEN 
womb as a golden chalice spilling forth a constant stream of white 
light, intermingled with the red blood of life. Visions such as this can 
have the effect of permanently altering and healing the negative im- 
ages of the female that we have been fed—this heals us, body and soul, 
from the wounds of ignorance and misogyny. 
101 


[PDF page 114]

i he pene ney aes Simi 
pies incuba (Vea ai pan 
Sea WHS Dette It Mise Sdasinks 
a1 Tele Gia HL! de® Age 
“Oe os 
pene wre <A palm sag sl vies — i es 
: 7 lo vt ak ae relies “ hii ‘Payee, 
; 7 a yea » 7 
ee ee : Ss Aloe Vy ey 0 eee pure Mem Vee : 
S oP Ge fh ys TF =e ee ncn 20 
_ ; SP er. Je a : Aes P : aa - 
| Ti - f thy & t* — | = (wih th 7 
A 7 “4 a 7 “ 
os 7 § (a Lae Ee ee | ie a ee 
=> 
- wey Wi dks heh ¢ 2.6) 26 g 
abs a a, ee ee : = tener te 
t a 
5 é ¥ 
: : Lf ‘ bas As ‘ , te 
a — ~ —_—— —— 
| 7 a ee el age : y =| — a) ; ane o> we 
| : _ be tA “MF On 
: = 7 eh TF 
" D ERY 
’ — “ Sa : “ A, =—he , 
iS L 08 ee 
: 7 Se a ae ees 
ele 4 ° m 
m 
a 
‘cits 
re 


[PDF page 115]

Peay Re SE Jel Re 48, is 
DAE ep 
{HO} SHEE 
POWER 
The Stories 
of Three Women 
During the winter of 1990-1991 I 
interviewed three women who have 
had strong experiences with men- 
struation. In the following chapters 
they tell their stories. 


[PDF page 116]

oJ) 
- 44 


[PDF page 117]

7 
THE SCIENTIST 
WENDY ALTER 
Wendy Alter was only thirty-four when she found a lump in her breast. It was 
cancer. Since graduating from college she had been a high-flyer with NASA— 
literally. Her ambition was to become an astronaut. As a chemist she had been 
exposed to toxic chemicals frequently during her adult life. But exposure to tox- 
icity was only one of the causes that Wendy suspected had laid her open to can- 
cer—another, equally insidious one, was her relationship to her femaleness. 
I started in a research position at NASA and gradually got more 
responsibility until I was managing large projects. I was in a very mas- 
culine-dominated world and had been ever since I could remember. 
In engineering classes there were very few women. I got an under- 
graduate degree in chemistry, and then I went back to school and 
105 


[PDF page 118]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
studied electrical engineering and computer science. After school, I 
went to work for NASA, and when I’d been there for a few years I 
started doing graduate work in materials engineering. I was always 
around men. In my younger years I wished that I were a man. I hated 
being female; I hated it; I hated it. 
My mother was a very, very confident woman who didn’t want 
to be at home, didn’t want to have anything to do with housework 
and children. She was professionally successful but she was of a gen- 
eration where that wasn’t quite respected and—well, she was re- 
spected, but people weren’t quite sure if it was all right. She was a 
supervisor nurse, very successful in her work. 
When I was a child I spent a lot more time with my father than 
I did with my mother. He spent a lot of time explaining things to 
me—he was very mechanically inclined and that was fun for me, and 
I think that’s why I eventually ended up in engineering. I had a 
younger sister, and I have an older brother who is autistic. 
When I reached my teens and I started to become noticeably fe- 
male, my father stopped having anything to do with me, and this was 
painful for me. He started giving me some strange messages that boys 
don’t like girls who are too successful and win races and things like 
that; it was a really painful, traumatic time. I was having my periods 
and I had terrible dysmenorrhea. My mother and sister had it too. I 
had very heavy flow, practically a hemorrhage, to the point where I 
would throw up—too much of a flow to wear a pad. It was terrible. 
And it was embarrassing because the school system completely denied 
that sort of thing—you were allowed to go and lie down at the nurse’s 
station for one class period only, and other than that they just had no 
tolerance. I remember one time my sister had to be carried out by two 
guys, Just as white as a sheet—and yet no one could talk about it. 
It still annoys me that this is not a subject that can be discussed in 
mixed company, and often not among women either. When your 
106 


[PDF page 119]

THE SCIENTIST 
friend gets a cold, you usually get the whole story of how it developed 
and every minute of it, but when you’re having your period, even if 
you're having terrible cramps, you have to pretend that everything’s 
normal because you can’t let anyone know. It’s shameful to have your 
period. We all have a million stories about embarrassing incidents or 
mortifying experiences. And of course the doctors at that time all took 
the position that the shame was a psychosomatic problem caused by 
the fact that a female didn’t feel good about being a female—that was 
the explanation that was given to me, and it was hard to refute be- 
cause indeed I didn’t feel good about being a woman. When I got old 
enough to talk back, I started asking these doctors if it had ever oc- 
curred to them that maybe they had the cause and effect the wrong 
way round—if you had to go through that much pain every single 
month because of your gender wouldn’t you come to resent your 
gender? It seems to me that their explanation was really weak. 
I was so resentful when I was young, really resentful, because I was 
unusually intelligent and that was problematic, as a female. Advisers 
were always telling me that I should become a librarian or a teacher. I 
really resented that. I did have a lot of dates and boyfriends, but I re- 
sented that things seemed to be easy for them. But at that time, I was 
an early feminist. I’m 38 now. My understanding of feminism was kind 
of wacky because what I wanted was the right to be treated like a man. 
I had to come to the realization that there is something inherently 
valuable in the female by going all the way into the masculine, and I 
did that successfully. I had to prove to myself and to everyone around 
me that I could do it. And I was very successful, but I became aware 
that there was something seriously wrong. The working schedule is 
not natural—the idea that you work for the same amount of hours all 
the time, and you’re supposed to be equally productive all the time, 
and you schedule your vacation three months in advance. It was so 
cut off from the real world. 
107 


[PDF page 120]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
My periods were a real bane to me when I was working. They 
were very, very irregular for many years and it seemed that my body 
had a mind of its own. It seemed to be trying to sabotage me; my pe- 
riods would come early or late so that they happened during some 
major event. For example, I got to participate in NASA’s weightless 
program—weightlessness by freefall in an aircraft. This was something 
I really wanted to do because I wanted to be an astronaut and this was 
a big step in the right direction. I was very ambitious from a young 
age. But the physiological training you take through the air force is 
very physically demanding. I had to go through the altitude chamber, 
where they pump out the atmosphere so I got to feel what it’s like to 
be at twenty-six thousand feet without air, and they also put me 
through an explosive decompression. And of course, my period came 
during the training session. I was worried about whether it would 
have an adverse effect on me—to be menstruating at twenty-six thou- 
sand feet. But I didn’t ask anyone about it; I just went ahead with the 
exercise. 
There was one older woman that I had sort of latched onto as a 
mentor—she was a very male-identified woman also. I mentioned to 
her that I had my period, and she laughed and said that the same thing 
had happened to her and indicated that she had had some fears about 
what might happen going in and being depressurized. She hadn’t said 
anything to anyone either. 
Then I had my period again the very first time I flew a zero grav- 
ity mission. When I have my period I become a little bit faint and 
light-headed—you know, things change—so to be in a very physically 
demanding situation like that and to have my period was awful. And 
every time, it was guaranteed to coincide with a physically demand- 
ing event. But my attitude was that it was essential never to let on to 
anybody that there would be anything wrong with me and to go on, 
to be able to give a peak performance. 
108 


[PDF page 121]

PHE=SCreEN LST) 
The years went by and I just started to feel kind of dead. The more 
successful I became, the more out of touch I felt. I felt like I was liv- 
ing a two-dimensional life somehow, as if I was some kind of cartoon 
character. Nothing seemed real any more. But it was really difficult to 
tear myself away because I had a big salary and everyone thought I was 
great and I was winning awards. But I wasn’t happy. I became more 
and more unhappy and I couldn’t even talk to anyone about it—what 
did I have to be unhappy about? It was a difficult time. 
I had very few female friends. | worked around men. I got mar- 
ried during that time and we had a role-reversal marriage. My hus- 
band didn’t work, he stayed home and he did all the cooking and 
shopping and house cleaning. After a while I did make a good female 
friend, and one day in a conversation with her and another woman, 
they mentioned how much they enjoyed having their periods. I was 
flabbergasted. It was so far from anything I had imagined. It had never 
occurred to me that there could be anything enjoyable about men- 
struating. That got me thinking. These were two very unusual, very 
thoughtful women who had done a lot of inner work. I really re- 
spected them, and what they said caught my attention. 
It took getting cancer to finally get me out of that situation. 
When I went through the ordeal with cancer I never even cried. In 
fact, when I received the diagnosis, my husband and I immediately 
went to the library and did a lot of research and found out everything 
there was to know and made decision trees. It was all very rational, 
and I had no feelings; I couldn’t feel. 
I was so used to not acknowledging feelings or giving them any 
attention or honoring them. All I could feel was this strange heaviness. 
That was the only way I could contact my feelings. I knew that wasn’t 
helping, and I felt that it had to do with how I got cancer. There were 
plenty of other reasons too—I have a family history of breast cancer, 
and I had been working with carcinogenic substances for years. 
109 


[PDF page 122]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
The breast cancer was one of a series of illnesses I had that were 
all in my female organs—starting small and getting worse, I had cer- 
vical dysplasia a few months before the cancer was diagnosed. I had 
had a couple of surgeries for endometriosis a few years before. I finally 
sat down and said, ““My body’s trying to get my attention.” It was as if 
I was trying to amputate anything of myself that was female. 
I went ahead and did all the standard medical things that were 
recommended, even though I was pretty uncomfortable with it. I 
didn’t feel I was in a position to explore any other options at that 
point. I carried on with work. I was in Alabama; there was no alter- 
native medicine there. And I didn’t know anything about alternative 
methods of treatment anyway. I had various people write to me and 
say drink wheatgrass juice or something like that, but at that point I 
wasn’t prepared to do something like that. So I had the traditional 
treatments, but I wasn’t entirely happy about it. I still suffer the side 
effects of the treatments. The chemotherapy is poison; you inject 
yourself with poison bad enough to kill the cancer but not quite bad 
enough to kill you. But your body knows, and when that poison goes 
in, you feel poisoned and you feel weak. I still don’t feel like I have 
my full strength back, and that’s not from the cancer, it’s from the 
treatment. Psychologically I had a very negative response to that treat- 
ment, and I know that attitude has a lot to do with one’s health. Any- 
way I did what I felt I had to do at the time, and then I left my job. 
My husband and I moved back to Washington—his home state. I 
pretty much spent the first year in shock. I didn’t know what I was 
looking for; all I knew was that I wanted to get back in touch with my 
feelings. I started taking music lessons and art lessons. It was very dif- 
ficult for me to do this. I started taking yoga; that was a revelation. I 
had no idea—I had completely underestimated what yoga was all 
about. I started to learn things about my body that I had never known. 
110 


[PDF page 123]

DE ESS CIE NEST 
My days now are very free of responsibilities. When we moved to 
Washington, my husband’s desk-top publishing business was becom- 
ing successful, and we did a turn-about since he hadn’t worked in Al- 
abama. He works at home, which has been a thorn in my side because 
I like to have a lot of completely quiet alone time, especially when I 
have my period. I never get that because he’s always there; even when 
he’s in another room in the house it’s not the same—TI still feel com- 
pelled to think about him and what he’s doing and whether it’s time 
for lunch yet. He’s really worked hard to let me do what I’ve needed 
to do, and this has been a struggle for him too, but we both recog- 
nize that it is really obvious that around the time of my period strange 
things happen, and he is just as happy to avoid me at that time. So it 
hasn’t been hard at all to work into a routine whereby I keep him 
posted and he gives me a wide berth—respectfully—he’s always very 
compassionate. It’s difficult to spend as much time alone as I want 
though because he feels threatened and neglected by this—I need a lot 
more time alone than he does and it’s hard for him to understand 
sometimes. I need to find a retreat. I really want to be alone, but I 
want to stay at home, I don’t want to go away. At home I have the 
things around me that I need for my creativity—my books, my com- 
puter. I don’t feel domestic, I don’t think about cooking much when 
I have my period—I’m not very hungry then. 
I still have a lot of trouble with cramps, and I have a medication 
that I take for it, but I’ve arrived at the point where I don’t want to 
take it any more than I have to. I feel that I want to go ahead and 
have my period—even though there is pain associated with it. I don’t 
want to just put chemicals into my body to deal with it. After the 
cancer treatments, I developed a real distaste for putting chemicals 
into my body, and I don’t like the state that the pain medication puts 
me into. 
111 


[PDF page 124]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
I use that time as an excuse to do what I really want to do, which 
is usually just to go to bed. I love to read, so I take a stack of books, 
ideas that I’m working on, things that I want to mull over and sort of 
germinate. Our bedroom is in a tower room that has windows all 
around and we have a water bed, so it’s really cozy. I just go up there 
and spend two days in bed and write and read. 
At first I did it as an excuse—any excuse to read rather than to do 
chores around the house, which I hate, but it didn’t take long at all for 
me to realize that as soon as I made a little room at that time amazing 
things were happening. I would just write prolifically and ideas would 
flood into my head, strong insights into things, and it would be a very 
positive experience. I realized that the negativity that I expressed 
sometimes was not inherent in having my period—it had to do with 
having to interact with people at that time. It was more annoyance at 
being taken away from what I really wanted to be doing rather than 
something inherent in the experience. 
I decided about a year ago that I wanted to do a strict detoxifica- 
tion, and I went to a nutritionist who put me on a very strict diet. 
After a month or so I had my period and I was out of my pain med- 
ication. I thought oh no, I’ll just have to dig in and wait this one 
out—but I never did get cramps that month. It was the first time I was 
really able to recognize that there is some kind of dietary factor. But 
that diet was so restricted that I was getting weak and losing a lot of 
weight. I was unhappy with it, so I decided to discontinue it. 
I suggested some other things she could try, such as thinking about elim- 
inating toxins psychologically as well as physically. I suggested that perhaps 
her cramps are a strength that isn’t being manifested. They might also be from 
pain that is not otherwise expressed, feelings of hurt that are being suppressed. 
112 


[PDF page 125]

THE SGIENTIST 
Cramps also have the function of making us focus on the womb—on our cre- 
ative center. There may be a need for the uterus to express itsel/—through 
having children or through other forms of creativity. I told her to remember the 
need for patience in healing long-term abuse of the body. Wendy felt she had 
abused her body all through her life. 
My poor body has really borne the brunt of whatever I wanted 
to do. When I had the chemotherapy they warned me that there was 
a 50 percent chance of being thrown into a premature menopause, 
and at the time I was disappointed that this didn’t happen—I would 
have been relieved. When I had endometriosis, I took a very power- 
ful male hormone for a year during which I had no periods; it was 
wonderful in terms of my career. But I realize now that even though 
I still have estrogen in my body, which increases the risk of breast can- 
cer, I am really glad I haven’t stopped menstruating because I never 
would have come to learn what a positive experience it can be. 
Yesterday, I was thinking about this and I thought, yes, I have es- 
trogen just coursing through my body and medically speaking it’s dan- 
gerous to me—I decided to reject that whole idea. How can it be 
dangerous to me? I thought about all the wonderful things that estro- 
gen does for me and how good it feels, and at that moment I could 
feel it in my body. I ended up doing this spontaneous meditation of 
gratitude toward my estrogen. It was a very good feeling. And I think 
if I took the time to do this on a regular basis a lot of my problems 
would go away. The illnesses I have had might never have happened 
if I had respected my body. 
Although NASA is a good equal opportunity employer, it is still 
run from a male perspective. There is a male way of making decisions, 
and it wasn’t until I had been there for ten years that I finally realized 
113 


[PDF page 126]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
that I am different from these people. I can do that little logical thing 
that they do, but it doesn’t feel right. There are some important things 
that they are leaving out. 
There is another way of looking at and solving problems that’s 
maybe more a female way. Take in a lot of information and then leave 
it alone—don’t work on it, don’t analyze it, don’t try and draw a log- 
ical conclusion, but let it all ferment—and the answer will come on its 
own. That’s what women have to offer, and I find, from my personal 
experience, that it’s a far superior way of coming to conclusions. 
If you use the analytical model, you can come to any conclusion 
you want, depending on what assumptions you choose to use, and 
that’s one reason why so many bad decisions are made. 
I have been really working on concepts of darkness and light—I 
had a dream and I woke up with this tremendous conviction that the 
light was suffocating the darkness, choking it off, and everything was 
terribly skewed and wrong because of that. This was a strange con- 
clusion to come to, because in all the spiritual work I’ve been trying 
to do, light is always the good part. But I’ve come to realize that the 
darkness is equally good, and I wrote some things about the idea of 
the darkness; I think that is where the fermentation happens. There’s 
a certain violence and strangeness that comes from this extreme wor- 
ship of the light without any darkness to balance it. 
This year more than ever before I’ve been struck by ideas that are 
incredibly exciting to me and have then come across other people 
having the same idea. Of course, this happens all the time in science— 
it’s well documented—the same idea arises in different places simul- 
taneously. Sometimes it comes in with such a force that it totally 
overwhelms me, some kind of outside force that takes over. 
I have wanted to set up my life so that there are very few con- 
straints on my time, so that when the inspiration comes I can be fully 
114 


[PDF page 127]

THE ESClrE NDS 
available for it. Now I’m becoming interested in going back out into 
the world again. It will be a creative work in itself to find a way of 
working that isn’t excessively scheduled; we are so obsessed with that 
in this culture. A few months ago I had to do something during my 
period that I had committed to, and I was miserable all the way 
through it. I was just so mad that I was there. My periods are regular 
now, so I plan in advance as much as I can. I have a chart and keep 
track so I can pretty well predict when it will come. And I suppose if 
it can schedule itself to come at inconvenient times, then there’s no 
reason it shouldn’t come at convenient times too. 
115 


[PDF page 128]

“7 
i 
Miia: Bie i "3 
poe ‘sO ‘eaten atin ecg onnenern 
peaks eg aby tip nmin gy sos m 
1 Ms, Hs ome aiilang, ay (dia poties coe 
Hal date Whee ovis dik Taint sii ere 
ais , : ihe Pog ayer oe lie igh ae a ee 
Pinar: © arbetipe avast: Saat ‘apes oh } Haale 
Ba We Ati Ci Ais Hh eae Ue: io yh splint oo cae 
A nie : yews rir it, ee - el: AN IPY - Patan: ae, os 
fig ae es Sh 4 o PHS: ly AE MENS, yo baaipe tities ag 
ah) PAAR ET eae va FRatlg Pidtes st ae 
b aye DF aaa maga geet? Sy, ani: Nba att AY Mee op Stared 
| ie nates Ele Teel bat ala ‘ie 
P bide iy whe aoe Beh ee ha y r 4 wen ah de ‘t 
OL eh ti Sat ee pai fh, a yt pie sa oe rn 
ee ee ee . ‘a ah i i sai eb At 
; a shay pe aes \oule y aie We ee 
a F { is) iy! ; 
MARIAN la a Ar inhi hen hin i! a , Wdhogtin'’h & ¥ oi sh 
WW Riteoi a _ 
' ; Me 
a “an c ea hy; 
} Pt 
hee " ib i 
ia) “ a bs 
" 1 re 
ie 
* yal inl 
7 my \ 
i eh, 
bf in i 
4 7 | pF 


[PDF page 129]

8 
THE EDUCATOR 
TAMARA SLAYTON 
Tamara Slayton is the woman behind the Menstrual Health Foundation, a 
nonprofit organization dedicated to providing education about the positive and 
powerful aspects of menstruation. I interviewed her at her home in Sebastopol, 
California, which then served as the headquarters for the MHF. (The MHF 
has since relocated to an office in downtown Sebastopol.) Her living room 
showed the evidence of her work—baskets overflowing with cloth menstrual 
pads in different sizes and colors ranging from white to pink floral to bright red; 
bulletin boards covered with organizational data for classes and workshops; 
books on menstruation and related subjects. 
As we talked it became clear that Tamara is a woman with a mission who 
has been thinking deeply about menstruation all her adult life. She first became 
aware of the deeper meaning of menstruation in 1974 when she was working 
with Jeannine Parvati Baker on the book Hygiea—A Woman’s Herbal. 
117 


[PDF page 130]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
She went on to establish the MHF in 1983, as it became increasingly clear to 
her that work in this area is vitally important. 
My mother is a hairdresser and has spent all her life around 
women, listening to women, counseling them, supporting them, 
being with them. So that was what I grew up with, that was my 
model of how women are in the world, and my mother really 
demonstrated the care of women. She didn’t take care of herself in the 
process, and that’s the part I have to undo, but she really was a model 
of a woman who listened to and cared deeply for other women. 
I had a total lack of initiation into menstruation. I remember 
standing in the closet with my mother, and I had to be the adult be- 
cause she was so embarrassed. I was scared but she was more so. After 
that came sexual activity that was totally unconscious, with no infor- 
mation, no support, and no one to talk to, resulting in pregnancy at 
the age of fifteen. I think that propelled me into working with 
women of all ages and helping them to become conscious. I was dri- 
ven to do it because of the pain that was unintegrated. I’ve been 
working on integrating that pain, trying to find my son, who was 
adopted, and really getting conscious of what happened and of what 
I lost. My grandmother got pregnant when she was seventeen, and 
they whisked her out of the East to California. When I was fifteen and 
I got pregnant, my mother whisked me out of the town we were liv- 
ing in to another one, and so it was a secret thing. 
When I was twenty-three I met Jeannine and began to become 
more conscious. It was toward the end of the back-to-the-earth hip- 
pie movement. I did a lot of primal therapy, tearing down ways of 
looking at things, and using psychedelics. There was a lot of breaking 
down to do. And I’m a survivor of sexual abuse, which is something 
118 


[PDF page 131]

THE EDUCATOR 
that I’m working through now. This shows up in my classes all the 
time; at least seven of the current class have been abused. It comes up 
as soon as we begin’to look at issues related to caring for ourselves. It’s 
very powerful work, and it’s beautiful to watch someone reclaim her 
inner child, and see how that shows up premenstrually, how that vul- 
nerability comes up very strongly. It’s powerful to start working with 
it from that point, and using it as part of the overall recovery. 
I first began to think of menstruation as something powerful after 
spending time with Jeannine and teaching classes on fertility awareness 
with her and really starting to develop a whole new concept of what 
it meant to cycle. For Jeannine it was a little bit like second nature, it 
wasn’t that she studied—she just came in with some information 
about menstruation. I lived with her for three or four years in com- 
munity, and we talked about menstruation regularly and shared our 
dreams and discussed what happened for us each cycle. 
I started changing my thoughts and the ways I spoke about my- 
self, particularly premenstrually, and then I started just observing. I 
became a witness, rather than judge or evaluator. I was very much 
into meditating, so I had developed that skill of watching. I also 
started teaching a class on fertility awareness at the local junior col- 
lege, and in that class it became clear to me that most women did not 
like the fact that they bled, did not have a positive experience when 
they first started their menstruation, and were actually relieved when 
they got pregnant. I was trying to teach them about fertility aware- 
ness and how to choose pregnancy consciously, and in some ways 
they were opting for an unconscious pregnancy because it relieved 
them of many things, including menstruation. I began to see that 
there was something missing, and that if I was going to successfully 
teach fertility awareness I needed to include something about men- 
strual awareness. 
119 


[PDF page 132]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
The more I looked, the more I saw that the negativity is cul- 
tural. The entire culture is shame-based and dysfunctional regarding 
menstruation. Around that time toxic shock syndrome began ap- 
pearing, and, realizing how dangerous tampons could be, I became 
inspired to make natural pads. 
A friend and I started thinking about what really needed to hap- 
pen if women were going to become conscious of what they were 
wearing to absorb their blood and the deeper issues associated with 
that. So we created a nonprofit educational corporation with profit- 
oriented activities in pad production. That was how the Menstrual 
Health Foundation started. 
For me, part of this consciousness came out of struggling with 
what kind of birth control to use. I had changed my diet and lifestyle, 
but I was still using an IUD. I thought, “this is crazy”—I had almost 
died from the IUD. I wanted a way to relate to my fertility that didn’t 
risk my life, so I began to track my cycle, and I began to see how it is 
punctuated by different hormone shifts. 
In her work, Tamara emphasizes the premenstruum as a useful time. 
Usually it is the actual time of bleeding that’s talked about as being the time 
of power, but Tamara really stresses the premenstruum. 
It’s my experience and the experience of the women I work with 
that the shift in consciousness arises when the shift in hormones occurs 
in the premenstrual time. In a healthy woman, this will hit three or 
four days before she begins to bleed, and it typically results in a desire 
to withdraw into solitude or to communicate about ways she wants to 
restructure her life or relationships. 
120 


[PDF page 133]

THE EDUCATOR 
I don’t see that as much during the bleeding time. When I hit my 
bleeding time I’ve usually settled into it, and there’s a release of the 
tension that’s been building up concerning that aspect of the creative 
dynamic. Before the bleeding I am really looking at things in frag- 
ments and pulling them apart, and then when it starts I begin to pull 
them all together. 
It got emphasized for me because I came into this work with 
PMS. For women who are highly symptomatic, from day fourteen 
they are already beginning to experience the premenstrual time and 
starting what we call the Kali period, starting to experience things 
falling apart and going out of control, in part because they are nutri- 
tionally deficient and suffer from a lack of exercise and excess stress. In 
healthy women it probably hits three to four days before they bleed. 
It’s a critically significant aspect of the female matrix and it takes 
one down into the darkness. Once you begin to bleed you begin to 
come back out. During the premenstruum the dream life is different. 
Childhood issues, rage, archetypes of Kali, the Black Madonna, dark 
goddesses, snakes, images of the dark—all that dark material that 
women have access to appears in dreams, and if we can claim that dark 
side, we can work with it. It tends to show up in dress too—women 
prefer to wear darker colors in the premenstruum. 
We live in a culture that suppresses female experience in general. Perhaps 
if women didn’t have so much cause to feel anger and rage, the premenstruum 
might then have a different quality. 
To me it’s a process of sorting through what am I being told is 
real about this time and then what is real to me. When you are able 
121 


[PDF page 134]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
to express rage in a safe and nurturing environment, then it does 
begin to slough off, and you get down to the next level of commu- 
nication. There’s a very ancient body of information available there. 
The first thing I work with is for women to be okay with this rage. 
There is a distinction between the crisis stage when one fears losing 
control—focusing on what is wrong with being female, attacked by 
one’s own body, isolated and despairing—and then moving into the 
observation stage of noticing that those are the cultural distinctions of 
a much deeper phenomenon. 
The nutritional aspect of PMS is also very important. It’s very 
hard to gather wisdom if your B vitamins are depleted and if you are 
strung out on sugar and caffeine. Then you are dealing with the 
breakdown every month rather than the integration of the wisdom. 
We eat too much fragmented food that has been overprocessed. But 
it’s very hard to get whole foods in a convenient way. Women are on 
the run, on the go—it’s hard to get our hands on something that is 
quick, nutritious, and affordable. 
Our soil is very depleted, which is really another metaphor of 
what’s happened to the feminine. So we’re faced with poor quality 
food and the fact that we can’t get healthful food quickly, and then 
when we do get something that is good for us, we eat it so fast we 
can’t assimilate it. With the amount of stress we experience in our 
lives, we need better nutrition to help us face that stress. I think that 
most people would benefit from vitamin supplements, but many 
women can’t afford them. 
The gathering of wisdom is available not only during the pre- 
menstruum and the period but also at fertility. There’s a whole wis- 
dom that’s being generated with each cycle—the creation and the 
destruction aspect each balancing the other—and to be able to listen 
to that inward conversation about how I’m living and how I’m con- 
ducting my life, I have to be healthy enough to be able to get to it, 
122 


[PDF page 135]

THESEDUGAT OR: 
otherwise I’m just repairing all the time. And that may be where the 
woman needs to be, but if you can get her to lie down and really take 
care of herself, she may be able to get to that deeper understanding of 
her life that her cycle will give her if she’ll just start listening. Ignoring 
that inner conversation is basically a dishonoring of the feminine in 
the culture—not just of women but of the whole need to go inward 
and gestate and be in darkness. So the one who carries that the most, 
the female, suffers. 
There is a rhythm to the feminine cycle, and if you watch, you 
notice the rhythm, and then you can begin to trust it. Through wit- 
nessing every cycle and seeing that rhythm in your psychology, your 
spirituality, your physicality, you begin to really see: Ah yes, I do go 
inward; things do get dark; I really need to feel safe in order to let 
things fall apart, and then I know I’ll pull through. I’ll be on top of the 
mountain and full of fertility and life will be bright and shiny again, 
and I’]] want to socialize and I’ll want to be close to people—and then 
I’ll want to go back down again. The more I observe, the more I 
trust, and the more I gather the fruits of both. 
During my premenstruum and my period I tend to do a lot more 
journal writing and a lot more assessing of what am I doing in my life 
now: Is this really what I want to be doing? What do I want to com- 
plete? What is it that I am avoiding completing? I usually make a list of 
who I need to say something to, who I need to communicate with, and 
what I am afraid to say to them, and then I go about doing those things. 
So I’m doing a lot of processing, a lot of grieving, a lot of letting 
go work. All this tends to be premenstrual. After I bleed I’m usually 
in my room, doing some kind of artistic process: meditating, praying, 
writing. I try to get in here at least one night and sleep in here on my 
own, which is challenging with the kids and my boyfriend, but more 
and more it’s where I find myself. I tend to do more artwork, to cre- 
ate more work around the transformational Goddess—Kali dolls, 
123 


[PDF page 136]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
witch dolls, things like that. I soak my pads in a bowl or a teapot, and 
the whole pad thing is a ceremony in itself—taking care of my blood, 
finding my pads, putting them back afterward. For me that’s very 
important; I had no rhythm as a child. I try to water my plants with 
my blood. And sometimes I don’t do any of that stuff, sometimes it’s 
all I can do to bleed and keep my life going. It’s such a conflict now 
for women, with all the responsibilities that we have as single moth- 
ers, to really incorporate that kind of life. It’s very challenging. We 
don’t want to create a whole new set of things we have to do. So I 
avoid beating myself up because I don’t withdraw every month. It is 
also a good time to think about how I earn a living. Ifa woman starts 
listening premenstrually, she usually runs into her heart’s desire and 
then she has to figure out how to get it. This is a good part of the 
goodies that are available in menstrual and premenstrual conscious- 
ness. 
I assert that what we are working with here is a matrix. With 
menarche you meet your wisdom, and with your monthly bleeding 
you practice your wisdom, and then at menopause you become the 
wisdom. 
124 


[PDF page 137]

9 
THE PRIESTESS 
HALLIE IGLEHART AUSTEN 
Hallie Iglehart Austen is a priestess. One of the early leaders of the women’s 
spirituality movement, she has dedicated her life to the return of the sacred fem- 
inine to modern life. She teaches the techniques of earth-centered ritual to 
groups of women and leads celebrations at equinoxes and solstices and other 
holy days for women, men, and children. Her first book, Womanspirit, came 
out in 1983 and influenced a generation of feminists hungry for a sense of 
woman-as-divine, whose spiritual yearnings could find only male gods and 
leaders in the established religions. Her latest book is The Heart of the God- 
dess: Art, Myth and Meditations of the World’s Sacred Feminine. 
Hallie lives in the hills above Point Reyes in northern California, in a 
round house that sits in a hollow in the land, surrounded by tall fir trees. She 
migrated here from Berkeley in 1986 to write and teach and live close to the 
earth. She writes in a small, cozy room at the top of a spiral staircase, with 


[PDF page 138]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
windows on three sides that look out at the swaying treetops and the blue blur 
of the ocean in the distance. It seems fitting that she live and work here, in this 
beautiful, still wild part of the planet, surrounded by earth and water, trees 
and sky. 
After graduating from Brown University in the late sixties, Hallie trav- 
eled to Asia and was very attracted to the Tibetan Buddhists she met in 
Dharamsala in the northern Indian Himalaya. She studied with them, win- 
tering in the high mountains and learning their ritual and meditation prac- 
tices. In between visits to India she returned to the States where she became 
involved with the growing feminist movement. 
It was a split time for me. On the one hand I was very involved 
with the feminist movement, and then I would spend time in India 
studying what was in many ways a male-dominated spiritual tradition. 
Eventually the split became overwhelming, and she moved back to the 
United States to see if she could discover a sense of the spiritual that enhanced 
rather than contradicted feminism. 
I decided to move to San Francisco, where so many exciting 
things were happening, and I continued my work with the Feminist 
Health Center. There the relationship between the patriarchy and 
women’s health became very clear to me. I didn’t have my period for 
a year and a half after taking birth control pills. Now it is something 
that I really guard and treasure because of having lived without it, and 
I felt that it was really something that the patriarchy robbed me of. 
It was quite a revelation to start working at the Feminist Health 
Center and to see what these pills had done to my body. When I was 
126 


[PDF page 139]

DHESPRIESTESS 
taking them in the mid to late sixties, it was just considered wonder- 
ful if you could get them—huge doses of hormones and no one was 
questioning it at all. 
The first time I bled after that year and a half was very dramatic. 
I was cross-country skiing up in Yosemite. I was off by myself and I 
squatted to pee in the snow and this red fell on the snow. It was the 
first time I’d seen my menstrual blood in a year and a half. It was very 
beautiful. I remember that moment, even though it was seventeen 
years ago—it was so visual. I was very happy because I’d been doing 
several things to try to get my period back. At the same time I had 
cervical dysplasia, so it was even more of a sign that my health was 
better, because I got rid of the dysplasia and got my period back. Be- 
cause of that experience I’ve really treasured my period. 
I remember in 1969 being furious with a lover, a man. We’d been 
lovers for quite a while, and he wouldn’t make love with me when I 
had my period. I felt good about my menstrual blood but I don’t re- 
member thinking of it as sacred until I started getting into women’s 
spirituality and the Goddess. 
In 1975 Hallie and several copriestesses created a menstruation ritual in 
Oregon for two hundred women. 
We did the blood ritual in a big meadow under a full moon. The 
main point was painting ourselves with menstrual blood and saying 
really affirmative things about menstruation. When we created the 
ritual, the idea was to counteract the negative ideas about menstrua- 
tion. Doing that ritual was wonderful and celebratory—I’m sure in 
retrospect that it really grounded me in my body in a way that | 
wouldn’t have been otherwise—that’s always an ongoing process of 
127 


[PDF page 140]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
course. [See appendix 2 for recommendations regarding HIV and the 
use of menstrual blood in ceremony.] 
I’ve been through various stages in my relationship with my 
bleeding. I tried using sponges but they didn’t hold enough for me. I 
can’t remember when the shift of not using tampons came—proba- 
bly when toxic shock syndrome first appeared. 
I don’t always know enough to be able to plan around my bleed- 
ing—sometimes I have a workshop scheduled months in advance. I 
feel like I’ve gone through many phases with my bleeding. Certainly 
there was a phase of really loving it and honoring it and opening up 
with wonder to something that had been denied for so long. After it 
became regular, I had severe cramps, so that was a whole other teach- 
ing and journey—learning to deal with the pain that demanded that 
I pay attention to it. I honor my period as best I can. 
I try to bleed on the ground at some point. It was a way for me 
to connect with the earth even when I lived in Berkeley. If] could go 
out and bleed onto a little plot of earth it was a way to ground myself 
even when I was living in concrete. That felt like a very important 
link, and it’s something I recommend to women who live in cities. If 
you can, just take a moment to bleed onto the ground. Your cells are 
blending with the earth; you are connected to the earth by your blood 
being there. Here I’m surrounded by the earth so it’s not so much of 
an issue. For me bleeding on the earth is an opportunity to experience 
it in a natural way. Sanitary pads aren’t too natural but they are con- 
venient—whereas bleeding on the earth, that’s real. It’s important for 
me to tap back into how people lived in another time. That may 
sound romanticized but when you live outdoors you don’t have to 
worry about bleeding on things—Native Americans bled on moss. 
What’s changed for me more recently is allowing myself to do 
whatever I want to do on the first day of my period—whether it’s going 
128 


[PDF page 141]

Re eee RAES DE SS 
offon a big hike, hanging around, or working. I’m allowing myself to be 
spontaneous, and if I don’t do that I get cramps. I know why so many 
women in offices get menstrual cramps—it’s because they are sitting at 
desks. If you can lie down or walk or whatever it really helps a lot. 
I think of the first day as the strongest time, I think of it as a tran- 
sitional time, the time between bleeding and not bleeding. I feel 
something beginning the day before, a lot of things are going on in 
my body at a cellular level. Sometimes the second day is also very 
powerful. I feel most respectful whenever the flow is heaviest. When 
you’re sitting there bleeding, bleeding, bleeding, it’s hard to keep a 
normal schedule because this thing is happening that is quite miracu- 
lous and also requires attention. 
A friend of mine told me of a woman she knew who, when she 
was menstruating, could always tell when blood was about to come. 
I was very struck by that. It made me want to be more aware, and 
now, when I start to feel the blood come, I go outside. It’s partly en- 
vironmental—I use fewer pads—but it’s also paying attention to the 
fact that blood is coming out of my body. I stop what I am doing and 
let it happen. I see menstruation as a Zen practice, as a monthly prac- 
tice. Again, because I didn’t have my period for so long, I learned to 
watch it more because it was important—watching it, asking myself 
what it was doing, watching it do its dance like the birds or the sky. 
This watching may have begun as a way to check in with my health, 
but now it’s almost like this being enters my body, and I watch it do 
its dance for those five days. Attention can be a key thing for women 
reclaiming their cycles. 
The last few years I have noticed extreme sexual energy around 
ovulation and menstruation. I feel myself particularly a priestess when 
I’m bleeding—it reminds me of my connection with all my sisters and 
all our mothers. It is something so basic and yet so big, so dramatic. It’s 
129 


[PDF page 142]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
amazing. Small wonder that whole ceremonies are based around it. For 
the Apache and several other Native American tribes the most impor- 
tant ceremony is the girls’ puberty rite. In India, there is a spring that 
flows with iron oxide after the monsoon rains. People from all over 
make pilgrimages to this spring in Kamakhya, Assam, and drink the red 
water as the menstrual blood of the Earth Mother, the Goddess. 
One of the most profound things for us Euro-Westerners to com- 
prehend is that for some traditional peoples, menses is a time of 
power. If we could just get that, a lot of things would change—the 
work schedule, our attitudes toward women, sicknesses, more con- 
scious birthing. Everything would change. 
The alchemical process that takes place within us means that our 
spirituality is internalized and that perhaps it comes more naturally, 
that we understand transformative processes. We know that it’s true, 
we know that it’s possible, we know that we can create this miracle in 
our bodies—birth, lactation, menstruation. That connects women up 
with the life force, more in the sense that we know that this happens 
in our bodies, so it enables us to be more life-affirming because we 
create life. I think we have more acceptance through our bodily 
processes that things happen without our controlling them. We are 
more accepting of mystery. Menstruation just happens, it happens 
through us, we don’t do anything to make it happen. 
What we’ve lost in this culture is a sense of awe. I think that when 
we reclaim our sense of awe about menstruation, about blood, about 
the cycles of the moon, of our fertility, of the incredible changes that 
go on in our bodies, then we will be able to reclaim our sense of awe 
about the universe, because to me the menstrual cycle is a microcosm 
of the universe. So instead of one’s lover being turned off by men- 
struation, one’s lover can bow to it from every cell, with deep feeling. 
We can re-create that sense of awe in the natural world by doing 
rituals, either alone or together. I think that because we don’t have 
130 


[PDF page 143]

THE PRIESTESS 
puberty rituals, we stay adolescents in some way. There has to be a 
reason why cultures have puberty rites. I see rituals and cycles as op- 
portunities for letting go, for renewal and purification. Rituals are all 
about letting go of the old and making space for the new because we 
live on a planet of cycles. That’s why menstruation is so important as 
we reclaim the true cyclical nature of life on this planet. 
131 


[PDF page 144]

exie, Vola said ead, yi x eit eit: 
Yona te yea papain Seay ivy sey 8 
Cited 1 hi ewe a iia beatae 
Pit ei eli! Ay: oT asl ol am. rh ane 6 Deny ete et 
de riion A pte dibras' gta Duel party WeG@t's apie re 
eels 7 Mea fea awl asi ee ee aie Par 
‘eeu y ee er is rangi? ie : 
Spice bah gels ee ae ee w sina 
a =e rR Gan em tengo Uaioe . 
rT . Won Ley eaely Miea Ey tak ie whee é ee, - _ 
ag a es ¢ hie v* moe on 2 ee es repay ut Oe Ha At 
- S a ry ij eh, THTS a’ my ad £34) HWA D) fy abt \ 
7 sF- = . ite « «6 eA zi ie pepe z i bl 
ies « ey | ? 4 ef © eG tli ® >i, 
ey i; { - 7 : ne \p a? > vi 7 vi oa I SAN Gees Ay 
n i . ; ide > ‘i , ‘ 1 go ' 
a ~ rt lew _ 
‘i . el Rar Tie as 
A * P S if i i] 
7 et ae ae o>. hk , ; wie ay a 7 oe pn? < W 
; ‘o ut yi . . en eee | ag i yy “J a ri Lie ev 
ioe Sal a | 7 “4 ee ALG 10 lay ' cee co md 
1 7 an i i - ‘ ‘ =) ; 
i, vo i re) 
ee ve " Ae nee 


[PDF page 145]

Pie Roel be Oy Lee 
RITUALS AND 
RECOMMEN- 
DATILOINS 


[PDF page 146]

hy . 
IMA SIAC TW 
Un hates wie Vi Css vi 
- - — rie.) Be 2: } 
a 
ee oe S— ee 
7 ence 
o 


[PDF page 147]

10 
RITUALS OF THE 
MOON-TIME 
A few years ago I had the opportunity to spend extended periods of 
time alone in a beautiful spot in the Sierras on the shore of Lake 
Tahoe, a vast blueness sacred to the Native Americans. I began to fully 
retreat when I had my period, being quiet and alone, sitting on the 
earth in the sunshine with lizards and blue jays for company, with the 
wind and the moon and the sun, the ripples and the colors on the lake 
as my guides and entertainers. I would journey inside my psyche and 
find myself suddenly in tears at something long forgotten, an event 
from my childhood or adolescence. My period became a time when 
I found I was particularly able to open up to my inner life and release 
emotions. I noticed that after the first few days of bleeding I would go 
very still and quiet for a day or so and seemingly nothing would be 
happening—an empty space after the weeping and remembering. 
$35 


[PDF page 148]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
Then as my period ended there would be several hours of clarity in 
which I would be particularly creative and open to information about 
the future—usually the coming month, but sometimes further reach- 
ing than that. 
This pattern continues, although usually it is less intense these 
days. Much of the deeply held psychological clutter appears to have 
been released—probably as much as my psyche wants to deal with at 
this stage in my life. Now I feel more up-to-date with myself so there 
is less to let go of, usually just anything I have held onto from the pre- 
ceding month. I still struggle with the empty time and often start to 
do things, imagining that nothing is happening internally so I might as 
well get back to business in the outer world. Often this backfires and 
I find that I accomplish little and use up a lot of energy. It’s hard to sit 
still when nothing is coming up to work on, it’s hard for me to honor 
that emptiness even though I know it precedes creativity, inspiration, 
and insight. It is all part of the process but it is an undramatic part, and 
I still have a tendency to ride roughshod over it. 
I don’t have a daily meditation practice. I prefer to adjust my 
inner and contemplative time to my own impulses. Often when I 
have my period I go into a quiet, solitary, and meditative space for 
three or four days; I’m then much less solitary the rest of the month. 
This feels like a very natural rhythm to me, and that’s why I think of 
the bleeding time as the Sabbath of women. 
I plan ahead for when I think my period will come. My periods 
are not precisely regular—I have a twenty-six to twenty-eight day 
cycle, and so I mentally circle those days in my calendar. I don’t plan 
anything for that time or for at least three days after it, meaning that 
about five or six days will be set aside even though only three or four 
of these will actually be a time when I don’t want to go out. I work 
mainly at home, so this is relatively easy for me to do. 
136 


[PDF page 149]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
As I have a month’s warning of when my bleeding time is likely 
to be, I can plan my social life, meetings, appointments, and so on 
around it. 
Often I will find myself entering a different state of awareness 
about two days before the bleeding starts—but not always. And I 
don’t usually feel the strong need to withdraw until I begin to bleed. 
Women really differ in this and for some women it is during the week 
before their period that they want to withdraw, and then when they 
begin to bleed they feel like being out in the world again. You have 
to tune in to what is right for you. 
In the day or two before I begin to bleed, I find that I stop want- 
ing to drive. I often find myself in the kitchen cooking a big stew or 
soup. This is what I will eat on the first couple of days of bleeding, 
when I will not want to cook. I also often get an urge to clean my 
home just before I begin to bleed. This appears to be very similar to the 
urge women get before giving birth—preparing the nest. I have talked 
to many women who share this sudden impulse to clean, clean, clean. 
This is a very useful biological pull for those of us who do not usually 
enjoy domestic tasks; it means that you have a nice, clean, and tidy 
space in which to retreat. I also make sure I go shopping to buy plenty 
of food before my period starts, and get in the firewood, so that I am 
free to go wherever my period wants to take me without having to be 
pulled out of that precious state by the demands of everyday life. 
When the first blood comes, I look at it, and always there is a 
spark of pleasure—of recognition—ah! there you are again. I get out 
my cloth pads from their place in the bathroom closet. Sometimes I 
have a cup of tea to celebrate the return of my blood, and to warm my 
body—blood temperature drops as we begin to bleed. 
The extent of my retreat varies from month to month. Some 
months are particularly powerful. I remember one month when an 
137, 


[PDF page 150]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
image of myself in isolation and silence had persistently crept into my 
thoughts. When my blood came the urge for complete silence became 
very strong. So I turned off the phones and made an agreement with 
myself not to turn the television or radio on if I got bored but just to 
sit with it. I called a couple of friends and told them that I would be 
incommunicado for a few days. For five days I spoke to no one, had 
no external stimulus, no contact with the media in any form. It was 
bliss. 
I wrote and meditated for long periods of time, finding it easy to 
go into a strong still place in myself. In the afternoons I went for gen- 
tle walks in the park behind my home. I wore no makeup and barely 
looked in the mirror. 
When I began coming out of this state, I looked in the mirror and 
saw that I looked like someone who was ill—and I realized that illness 
is partly a retreat into the interior world. I wasn’t ill, I felt fine, but my 
personality wasn’t present on my face—I didn’t have a face for the 
outside world. All my energy was focused on something that was hap- 
pening inside. It took a couple of days for my face to return, for the 
energy to come back to the surface. 
During this time I had several big dreams, and I made a leap for- 
ward in my understanding of this book and the shape it needed to 
take. It felt necessary and healing and loving to give myself this time. 
I felt more centered than I had for a while, and wrote several impor- 
tant letters that represented the completion of two significant rela- 
tionship problems that had been ongoing in my life. I felt so good 
during this time it is hard to find words to describe the state. It’s not 
simply that I was happy—it was more than that. I was deeply at home 
with myself and in touch with the spirit, with a power that is gentle, 
loving, and vast. I felt that spirit, that energy, suffusing me, filling me 
up, loving and nurturing me. 
138 


[PDF page 151]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
But I don’t need or want to do such a strong retreat every month. 
Sometimes it’s simply a question of sleeping alone for a night or two 
and spending some quiet time in meditation during the first couple of 
days. If I have to do something, some event that was planned months 
in advance, I have found that I can enlist the help of my cycle. As 
Wendy Alter noted in chapter 7, when she was working at NASA and 
aspiring to be an astronaut, her period always came at the most in- 
convenient time. Nowadays she is paying attention to her cycle and 
says, “I suppose if it can schedule itself to come at inconvenient times 
then there’s no reason it shouldn’t come at convenient times too.” 
I have found over the past couple of years that my period has re- 
ally become my friend. Once I inadvertently planned to run a seminar 
on the second day of my period. I talked to my body about it the 
night before, and asked if it would be okay for me to go, as I didn’t 
want to let people down. When I woke up that morning my blood 
flow was very heavy and I felt rather distraught about having to drive 
to the venue and then teach—but miraculously, as soon as I left the 
house I stopped bleeding. After the teaching ended, the bleeding 
started again. It seemed that the heavy flow in the early morning had 
been my body going into action to take care of the day’s bleeding 
while I was able to be still and be in touch with myself. When I 
needed to be present for the outside world, the bleeding stopped. I 
don’t recommend abusing the good nature of one’s body—but it is 
certainly possible to have a relationship of cooperation and goodwill 
between the instinctive drive and the conscious will. The instincts 
have to feel deeply respected, though, otherwise they will rebel 
against being ignored, and illness or dis-ease of some type will result. 
Most of us have ignored our instincts and, under social pressure, 
carried on as normal when we have our period. | suspect that this re- 
sults in a backlog, so that when one first starts to allow the natural 
3? 


[PDF page 152]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
rhythm to emerge, the body-mind has a need for intensive retreat to 
mend the damage of all the years of ignoring the bleeding. I also think 
that I may be an extreme case—it is clearly part of my life’s work to 
deeply investigate the mystery and meaning of the menstrual cycle, 
and this may mean that I have a particularly strong need for retreat at 
this time. Everyone has to find her own rhythm, her own need for si- 
lence, for withdrawal, for healing. 
RESENTING MY PERIOD 
Sometimes my period feels like an unwanted intruder into my life. 
Even though I have been focusing on it for several years and have dis- 
covered what richness it can hold, sometimes I wish I could just sup- 
press it. Do I really need to go through this mess and cramps and 
inconvenience and grumpiness and not feeling like going out every 
month? Wouldn’t once or twice a year be enough? 
This feeling tends to come on when | am waiting for my period 
to begin. There is a heaviness to my body and I just wish it would start 
and get on with its thing. At moments like that I feel distant from my 
body and its processes and somewhat repulsed. And old thoughts drift 
through my mind like, “why don’t I have a convenient noncyclical 
nonbleeding body like a man?” 
My breasts are tender and so is my heart. Everything hurts 
more—I watch a movie on the television and weep, I cry myself to 
sleep, I worry about the world. I feel colder than normal, and vulner- 
able in a raw and aching seemingly never-ending way. I have felt this 
feeling so many times in my life—and yet here I am, warm and dry, 
with food in my kitchen, clothes on my back, in a better situation for 
survival than most people on this planet. Yet nonetheless, in the time 
immediately before I begin to bleed, | am weak and anxious and I 
140 


[PDF page 153]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
want someone, a big cosmic momma, to give me a cuddle and tell me 
that everything will be all right. 
I find myself in more self-doubt at this time. Am I making a great 
big mess of my life? Can I write this book? I battle the demons of self 
doubt with all the weapons I have gathered over the years. I just get 
on with my work, and tell them, kindly, to please leave me alone. I 
know that they are just picking on me because I feel vulnerable today. 
I light a fire to warm the room and my heart. I call a friend. I cook a 
nounshing, filling meal full of carbohydrates and comfort. I go easy on 
myself. 
MUNDANE RITUALS 
The choices we make at a mundane everyday level are very impor- 
tant. Being mindful about the details of how and where and onto 
what we bleed all adds up to an increasingly harmonious relationship 
with our practical, political, and spiritual selves. 
Tampons are convenient but can be a health hazard. Paper dis- 
posable pads use up trees and add to the mountains of garbage we 
plow into the earth. All the arguments against disposable diapers hold 
true for menstrual pads. The obvious alternative is to go back to using 
cloth. The idea has echoes of “rags” and pre-war poverty, but in prac- 
tice I’ve found that cloth menstrual pads work very well. 
I’ve been using them for several years now and I love them. It 
sounds gruesome and messy but in practice it’s a breeze. They are 
made of soft, cozy, absorbent 100 percent cotton flannel that fits 
snugly against the body—they are much more comfortable than paper 
disposable pads. They don’t slide around inside your underwear and 
you don’t need to use a belt or pins. I’ve not had a single accident. In 
fact I used to have more leakage and spillage with paper pads, and a 
141 


[PDF page 154]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
friend of mine who bleeds very heavily at night has found that the 
flannel pads are far superior to throwaways. 
Once used, I sling them in a bucket of cold water to soak (with 
a lid on it, to keep the smells in and not offend other members of the 
household), use the water to feed my plants (you should have seen my 
bean crop this year), and then put the whole lot in the washing ma- 
chine on a hot wash when my period’s over. The total job takes five 
minutes. Although there is an initial outlay to purchase cloth pads, 
they last several years, and over time save you money. 
They cause significantly less damage to the environment, and I’m 
relieved to know that my period isn’t contributing to marine pollu- 
tion or landfills. I also enjoy a wonderful feeling of autonomy at not 
having to rush to the pharmacy at the first sight of blood. There is no 
danger of exposure to carcinogens like dioxin, which can be found in 
bleached paper products, including pads and tampons, and no danger 
of toxic shock syndrome. I am also free from the possibility of con- 
tracting any of the nefarious infections caused by tampons and by the 
lack of circulation that results from the plastic backing of the paper 
pads. All in all, it’s a much better deal. And I like the fact that I get to 
see my blood—it looks much nicer on a piece of floral flannel than it 
ever did on a grungy old tampon or a white paper pad. 
As Tamara Slayton commented in chapter 8, using cloth pads is a 
ritual in and of itself. Getting my pads out marks the beginning of my 
period. I keep them in a pretty bag in a closet. Soaking them and wash- 
ing them emphasize for me the cleansing, clearing up aspect of my pe- 
riod. Giving the soaking water to my plants and to nearby trees reminds 
me of my connection to nature, to the earth and her cycles. And then 
folding them up and putting them away when my bleeding has finished 
marks the end of the sacred pause in the month that is my moon-time. 
For women working outside the home it is often simply imprac- 
tical to use cloth pads during the day. You can use them at night and 
142 


[PDF page 155]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
use disposables at work. I really don’t like using paper pads any more 
and so I usually try and think of a way to use my cloth pads whatever 
the circumstances. One solution that I have used is to carry a plastic 
lined pouch with me. I quickly rinse out the used pad, pop it in the 
pouch, and then wash it out properly when I get home. I have also 
successfully used cloth pads while on vacation—I just take three or 
four pads with me, and wash them out and hang them to dry in the 
hotel bathroom. 
BLEEDING ONTO THE EARTH 
When I was first introduced to the idea of bleeding onto the earth by 
a friend of mine, I thought it sounded a little silly, a little pretentious. 
But I started doing it tentatively, and began to feel a flicker of con- 
nection to something very old. One of the problems I had was figur- 
ing out how to do it. Native American women traditionally bled onto 
moss while sitting on the earthen floor of the moon-lodge. Where 
was I supposed to sit and bleed? Even if I went and found a nice piece 
of earth to sit on, I didn’t want to stay there for the whole time. Then 
I started using cloth pads to absorb my blood and soaking them in 
water before I washed them. I realized that I could pour the soaking 
water onto the earth. So now that’s what I do. The water is a beauti- 
ful red, and I pour it onto the ground around plants. The act of doing 
this fills me with a feeling of connection, of rightness, of being at 
peace with something that is often neglected in modern life. Simple 
acts of value, simple knowledge. 
It’s like chopping wood, rocking a baby, baking bread, or drink- 
ing from a fast-flowing mountain stream. It’s one of those acts of 
being human that is timeless, of eternal value, part of the steady round 
of life and death. The cells that die in my body, that are carried in the 
143 


[PDF page 156]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
menstrual blood, are food for the earth. What dies gives birth. What 
dies feeds those who live and will live. 
If I ignore my blood, I get distanced from this knowledge. I fear 
and dislike my blood—for without the knowledge that it too is food, 
that it too is a gift I bear, then I see it as purely loss. A waste of blood, 
a waste of time, a baby that wasn’t conceived. Whether I desire preg- 
nancy or not, my blood is always a gift. And it is a gift in a literal sense, 
as well as a psychic gift to myself. It is a gift from my body back to the 
earth: the mother that has fed and nurtured me every day of my life. 
Women’s blood is not waste. It is fertilizer for the earth. This was 
known by all the earth-centered peoples, by those who revered the 
Goddess and who recognized the female and her body as the conduit 
through which life comes, and therefore sacred. This life comes not 
only in the form of offspring, but also in the form of precious blood, 
given every month to feed the earth, the plants and insects, and all the 
beings of the planet. This is another aspect of the miraculous interplay 
between woman and life. We waste this precious resource, just as we 
waste the rich placenta after birth, because we fail to recognize the 
value of the female. We look on this blood, full of iron and other min- 
erals, and all we see is waste matter, and so we pour it into our sewage 
systems instead of doing the obvious and pouring it onto the earth. 
This is simple knowledge. You don’t have to study hard, you 
don’t have to read any books at all, you don’t take any exams or pick 
up any diplomas. No one will pat you on the back and say how clever 
you are or how hard you have worked. The reward is purely inter- 
nal—in the feeling of being in harmony with something so essential to 
human life, something that we have taken for granted for the last few 
hundred years. 
One of the most effective ways to ground yourself when you 
move house is to shed your menstrual blood upon the land of your 
new home. Then your cells are literally on the land, the land is fed 
144 


[PDF page 157]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
and recognized by you, and you have created a psychic and cellular 
link with the earth. This can have a powerful effect on your relation- 
ship with your home territory. It is like an animal making its mark 
perhaps, and it is also an act of love—to give a part of yourself to the 
land creates a two-way relationship to replace the one-way attitude 
that we normally have toward the land that we live upon. As Hallie 
Iglehart Austen recommended in chapter 9, you can do this even if 
you live in town—take an hour or so to visit a park or sit in your back 
garden and let a few drops of your blood embrace the ground. Bleed 
at the foot of a tree that you particularly like, and watch your rela- 
tionship with that tree develop. You will notice the tree in a new way 
and feel a bond that is not often experienced by people who do not 
live close to nature. 
THE PULSE OF THE. EARTH 
The earth emits a pulse to which we are al] attuned. This pulse regu- 
lates our heartbeat and the cycles within our bodies, from the steady 
round of the blood pulsing through the veins to the monthly emission 
of blood from the menstruating woman. This pulse emanating from 
the earth is very, very subtle. Few people can actually feel it, but that 
does not mean that it isn’t there. 
The Indians of the Amazon rainforest recognize the existence of 
this pulse, and they listen for it when they go in search of the climb- 
ing vine that is one of the chief constituents in their sacred tea— 
ayahuasca. “By listening for a drumbeat that emanates from the vines 
on the astral plane, talented feitores can locate those sites in the rain- 
forest where the greatest concentration of vines will be found.”! 
Mountains are strong places to feel the pulse. The sacred moun- 
tains of the world send out this sound, this rhythm, such as Uluru 
145 


[PDF page 158]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
(Ayers Rock) in Australia and Mount Shasta in California. Lakes and 
rivers are also good places to tune in to the energy of the earth, espe- 
cially the large lakes like Lake Tahoe and Lake Baikal. 
Listening to this pulse comes most easily to the woman in her 
bleeding time. Then she is open to the mystery of the pulse and the 
wisdom it contains. When you are in the pulse and can feel it, then 
you are in the hands of the Goddess—of the great mysterious force 
from the inside of the planet. Your body is healed and strengthened by 
the direct contact and knowledge of this pulse. This is what women 
are listening to in their bodies when they sit still during menstruation, 
when they sit still and they bleed upon the land. This is the deeper 
meaning behind sitting on the land and bleeding directly onto it. 
BLOOD VISIONS 
The red dot that Hindu women paint on the third eye is a symbol of 
the menstrual blood. Originally women would have painted their 
third eye with their actual blood. The magic of the blood opens the 
sixth chakra (the energy center associated with spiritual and psychic 
vision). The visionary aspect of menstruation is clearly invoked by this 
practice. The blood carries in it the cells of the body, and therefore it 
contains the knowledge of the DNA. The genetic code, the lineage, 
is contained within the bloodstream. It may exist at a level that cannot 
be detected by modern science, but it is there. Every cell in the body 
is a microcosm of the whole. By painting the third eye with the 
blood, we open ourselves to the knowledge hidden in the genetic 
code. This knowledge includes deep ancestral awareness and can bring 
understanding of our own family patterns and of those of the human 
family. We are all one family, ultimately descended from the same 
mother. 
146 


[PDF page 159]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
We all have within us the knowledge of every generation of 
human beings that has ever lived. Locked into that coding is a mass 
of information gathered throughout history. At times the information 
sleeps; at times it wants to come alive again. We are living at a time 
when the knowledge of the earth, of the female, is surging back into 
the collective awareness, and through our blood we can tap into it. 
Next time you bleed, try connecting consciously with your blood. 
Try painting a gentle red dot on your forehead, and see what knowl- 
edge from the earth and from our ancestors flows into your con- 
sciousness. 
FINDING YOUR OWN WAYS OF HONORING 
YOUR BLEEDING 
The challenge here is to discover your own rhythm and your own 
needs and desires within the structure of the monthly cycle, and then 
to stay fluid with the information that comes. Every month is differ- 
ent. I have found keeping a journal very helpful. I record the day of 
my cycle, the phase of the moon, and any dreams, thoughts, fantasies, 
and synchronicities that attract my attention and seem to hold infor- 
mation. This process has led me to develop my own rituals around my 
periods. These are very simple, like wearing a particular pair of ear- 
rings that live on my altar for the rest of the month. They have an im- 
portant role in reminding me of the sacredness of bleeding. Rituals 
help to counter the ignorance and denial of the power and beauty of 
menstruation (and, therefore, of being a woman) that is all around us 
in our culture. 
None of these ideas and observations about menstruation should 
be taken as absolutes. Like every process, menstruation is an individ- 
ual experience, for each woman, each month. For me, menstruation 
147 


[PDF page 160]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
is the time when I can least get away with activities that are not in har- 
mony with my deepest self: Traveling may bring on pain and feelings 
of disharmony because travel is sometimes a distraction in my life and 
usually goes against the inward-turning stillness of menstruation. But if 
the travel is appropriate and necessary, then I can do it with reasonable 
grace. Thus the period is a great teacher, and the information it gives 
us can be used in less aware times of the month. Sometimes it is good 
to be around male energy when I menstruate, sometimes it is wonder- 
ful to make love. Sometimes it is anathema and feels completely 
wrong. By making rules about what is and is not permissible in men- 
struation we lose our connection to the essential knowledge of our 
unique and ever-changing, ever-staying-the-same, individual reality, 
and thereby lose one of the greatest gifts of being in a female body. 
IDEAS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR 
MENSTRUAL RITUALS 
It is essential to begin to get in touch with yourself. Keep a journal 
and record daily the day of your cycle and the stage of the moon, and 
make notes about your energy level, impulses, emotions, and so on. 
By doing this you always know what day of your cycle you are in and 
how that relates to the moon’s cycle, and you begin to learn what 
your own rhythms are. It is important to record impulses even if they 
are not followed. Here is an example of one day’s entry: “January 9, 
Day 4, Full moon. Woke up feeling very dreamy, it was hard to con- 
centrate on my work but I persisted.” This exercise is more difficult 
to do if you are on the pill as it distorts the cycle completely. IUDs 
affect the menses too. However it is still helpful to keep a journal and 
see what is going on. 
148 


[PDF page 161]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
Honor what your body wants. Learn to identify your condition- 
ing and then question it. When you have a strong feeling to do or not 
do something when you are menstruating then follow the impulse 
and see what happens internally as a result. If you are a meditator, no- 
tice what your meditation is like when you are bleeding and at other 
times in the cycle. Record this information in your journal. Experi- 
ment with your dreaming by asking questions of your dreams before 
going to sleep and by making a special effort to remember and record 
them. Sometimes it helps to focus your attention by putting a crystal 
under your pillow. 
Experiment with making up your own rituals. The Native Amer- 
ican tradition is a good one to borrow from, because Native Ameri- 
cans have a strong understanding of ritual and a respect for 
menstruation. You can make the moon the focus of your ritual. Some 
Native American women pray to the moon for the healing of irreg- 
ular cycles, and I have found that it is particularly connecting and en- 
riching for me to meditate on the moon and make her in some way 
a part of my menstrual rituals. You can also use your blood itself— 
paint it on your third eye before you go to sleep to enhance dream- 
ing; make a ritual painting of yourself menstruating, and incorporate 
your blood into it. Reclaim the blood as a sacred fluid, honor your 
body as the body of the Goddess. 
It’s a good idea to make a space in your home that is your own sa- 
cred place—a room where you can dream, doze, paint, draw, sew, 
write. If not a whole room, then at least you can make an altar—a 
special little shelf or table that acts as a focus for ritual activity and for 
centering and strengthening of the spirit. Most women have some 
kind of altar in their home without necessarily ever calling it that: a 
shelf that holds precious items and photographs of loved ones is actu- 
ally an altar. It is just another step in reclaiming our own connection 
149 


[PDF page 162]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
to Spirit to add a candle or two and some sage or incense, perhaps a 
bowl of water and some earth, and there you have a sacred space be- 
fore which to sit and center yourself. 
As Hallie Iglehart Austen said in chapter 9, rituals are important 
because they focus our attention. “Honoring one’s period is really a 
powerful way to develop these abilities.” 
Rituals change and develop to suit the nature of the times. Now 
is a time when women are reclaiming the power and value of men- 
struation, and we are all the cocreators of a new way of celebrating 
being female. In her teaching about ritual creation, Hallie emphasizes 
the necessity of courage and experimentation. “We can take some- 
thing from a tradition and make it our own—or maybe take it back to 
its original meaning. The tradition of the blood of Christ and the wine 
is I’m sure taken from the menstrual blood.” 
Tamara Slayton encourages women to use their period as a time 
of creativity: “In one class we make dolls—menstrual dolls, fertility 
dolls. This is a big part of the work with the younger girls. Art is the 
access to the imagination. We make little beeswax uteruses; we make 
greeting cards congratulating each other. During advent we made 
lanterns, and last time we made golden crowns to honor the Madonna 
in us—that was really awesome seeing all these women sitting in this 
room wearing golden crowns—very powerful.” 
We can heal the wound of our lack of formal initiation into 
womanhood by remembering just what it was like when we began to 
menstruate. Once we have remembered, we can begin to undo the 
negativity that was programmed into us. Then perhaps a group of 
women could get together and create a post-facto puberty ritual. 
Using the natural creativity of the period to get in touch with 
yourself through writing and painting can be very beneficial. Often 
understanding of deep processes comes easier through painting and 
writing than it does through trying to tackle the problem directly. The 
150 


[PDF page 163]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
diffuse state of awareness that comes with menstruation makes this an 
ideal time for letting go into what Castaneda’s Don Juan called the 
nagual and Australian aborigines call the Dreamtime—the unknown 
of ourselves where there is wisdom and knowledge—and allowing 
information to come through creative channels. Try writing about 
your own experiences of menstruation and of puberty. You may 
learn unexpected things about yourself. This is also a great way to ac- 
cess information about the future. 
In the Tibetan Dzog Chen tradition, there is a purification practice 
every dark of the moon. This involves visualizations and chanting, 
which clean out all your chakras, and a bathing ritual. It’s possible that 
this practice originated because women menstruated at the new moon. 
I usually have at least one very long bath during my period, often to- 
ward the end, in which I am mindful of purifying my body, and of let- 
ting go of whatever needs to leave. 
This purification can be focused on in meditation by asking “what 
don’t I want to carry around any more?” Think of yourself as a snake 
shedding its skin, leaving behind the past and being free to move on 
to the next month. 
You can also incorporate the invocation of goddesses associated 
with the menstrual cycle into your rituals—examples are Artemis/ 
Diana (goddess of the moon, the wilds, and the protector of women), 
Aphrodite and Isis (associated with the full moon, sexuality, and fer- 
tility), Hecate (crone goddess of the dark of the moon), Kali, and the 
Tibetan dakinis and their skull bowls of blood. 
THe SACKED EGELLY 
If we aren’t soft with ourselves in our bellies then we may have men- 
strual problems from tensing up that area. Letting the belly go soft 1s 
ti 


[PDF page 164]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
a challenge in today’s culture. The violence of our times makes us 
tense up the belly region to protect ourselves, this is an instinctive re- 
action, and the idea that women aren’t really women and shouldn’t 
have bellies also means that women tighten unnaturally there. 
Our current cultural preference in the Western world for flat and 
androgynous teenage bellies has several causes. One is our denial of 
the power of the womb. In cultures where the feminine is more re- 
spected and honored, such as India, the roundness of women 1s con- 
sidered beautiful, and in fact women strive for curves and flesh. 
When we take back the reality of being women and the power 
contained within the generative cycles of our beings, then the belly 
comes back into its own as the home of the womb and ovaries. The 
belly is also, of course, the home of the digestive process, another part 
of life that we culturally ignore. We tend to eat food fast and without 
ceremony, without saying thank you or grace, without allowing rest- 
ful time for digestion to lovingly and fully take place. Instead we jump 
up the minute we have eaten so we can get back to Doing Things. 
Fear of the aging process and overidentification with youth also 
promotes a denial of the belly. Men and women don’t develop bellies 
until maturity, and usually not until after pregnancy for women or 
middle-age in men. Thus the belly is a signal that youth is gone for- 
ever, and in a culture that venerates youth above sagacity, there is lit- 
tle to be gained in the eyes of one’s peers from having a belly. This is 
not to support laziness and lack of fitness. Having healthy stomach 
muscles and a generally trim and fit physique is always to be lauded, 
but it is natural for women to have more rounded stomachs than 
men—look at old paintings or photographs of women from other cul- 
tures. It is a twentieth-century phenomenon to expect women to 
have flat stomachs, just as it is a twentieth-century phenomenon to 
rush away from the table once you have eaten and to pretend that 
nothing is happening when you have your period. 
152 


[PDF page 165]

RITUALS OF THE MOON-TIME 
SOFT BELLY—A MENSTRUAL MEDITATION 
I learned a meditation called “Soft Belly” from Stephen Levine at a 
lecture he gave some years ago. It was very effective, and I went 
round for days afterward incanting soft belly, soft belly gently under 
my breath and being aware of the many subtle ways I would hold and 
tense my belly as I went through my day. Soft belly, soft belly. That’s 
all it is really—just focus on your belly and allow it to soften. You may 
want to go into the tension first—feel how tense it can get, make it 
really tense and experience that and then say softly to yourself “soft 
belly” and allow the tension to float away; feel the release and the 
happiness, the peace and easiness of having a soft unjudgmental happy 
little belly full of love and compassion and tenderness for the world 
and everything around you. 
Let go into that softness and allow it to spread all over your body 
and feel the luscious loveliness of your whole being and the juicy de- 
licious femaleness of having a soft and pliable, a warm and comfort- 
ing belly. A place for babies to grow, a place for feelings to develop, 
for ideas to gestate, for food to be digested and fully absorbed, a place 
for all your feelings to be worked on and out and through, a place for 
cozy late night suppers and happy active early morning breakfasts, a 
place for comfort, for solitude, for lying on the earth feeling the hot 
sun On your warm back as your soft and tender loving belly caresses 
your mother, the earth. 
Relax more deeply into your belly now. Feel the goddess within 
you. She loves your round and full belly; she loves the femaleness of 
you, the fecund weightiness of that full soft belly. Let it go even more. 
Softly, softly, your belly is rounding out, letting go, and you are com- 
ing home, more and more at home with yourself, as you release the 
images of a flat and masculine teenage nonbelly—for now you are a 
woman who has given or who can give birth to another being, and 
153 


[PDF page 166]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
to do that you need a belly. So let your belly be, be proud of it, wear 
it in the world along with your big heart and your shiny eyes; wear 
your round soft tender loving belly out into the world and soften all 
around you with the power of your soft and tender loving belly. And 
when a child is crying pull him onto your lap and let him sit on your 
belly, and when your inner child is crying put your hands on your 
belly and rub it softly saying, “it’s okay, I’m here, and here is our soft 
and tender, loving belly, the center of our being, the home of our 
womb, the center of gravity, the deepest place within.” And nurture 
that belly space, for within it is the treasure trove of your creativity 
and your gift for the world. 
MENSTRUATION AS ALCHEMY 
The whole menstrual cycle is an alchemical process in itself, during 
which every woman who bleeds goes through a transformation inside 
herself. To menstruate means to live through a cyclical transmutation 
in which the past is shed and the new is embraced. Experiencing this 
transformation through conscious ritual awakens us to our connection 
with the cycles taking place all around us and to our relationship with 
all life. 
154 


[PDF page 167]

rh 
BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
Just as our ancestors honored woman’s ability to create 
humans from her womb and feed them from her breast, 
they also honored the Earth as the Great Mother who 
nourishes us and from whose body we are all created. It 
is clear that in order to save ourselves—not to mention 
fulfill our true potentia-—we must honor Nature, the 
Goddess, and women. 
Hallie Iglehart Austen, The Heart of the Goddess 
MENSTRUATION AND RELATIONSHIPS 
Deciding to have a deeper relationship with your bleeding means not 
only changing your relationship with yourself, but also shifting the 
ways in which you relate with others. It’s one thing to sidle off alone 
into some quiet time, and it’s another step to say to someone else, “I 
need to be alone now to be with myself; I have my period.” 
You don’t have to do it all at once. If you are concerned that you 
will meet opposition from your partner and family, try working first 
155 


[PDF page 168]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
with yourself and identifying the parts in you that are against your ex- 
periencing your bleeding, that are against the idea of it being a pow- 
erful time. You may well find an inner voice that tells you that you are 
wasting your time, that it is merely a biological function, that being a 
woman is simply a messy business, and that you should just get on 
with it and experience it as little as possible. Get to know your con- 
ditioning and your biases. If it feels right, try engaging the conflicting 
voices in a dialogue and see how they interact. Encourage them to 
come out with their worst, and then see if there is a natural tendency 
for them to begin relating a little easier. Compromise may begin to 
emerge. The conventional voice may say, “Well, it’s okay for you to 
meditate more but just don’t think about bringing those cloth pads 
into the house.” In time, as you experience the sense of wholeness 
that comes from living your bleeding time more fully, these conflicts 
will iron out, and the conventional part will be increasingly prepared 
to change. 
When you feel you know your inner conflicts a little more, it will 
be easier to risk being unusual with other people. It will also be much 
more likely that they will feel at ease with what you are doing. Our 
friends and loved ones are generally sensitive to our inner conflicts. 
Many arguments and relationship difficulties are the result of unrec- 
ognized inner battles. 
The Role of the Menstrual Cycle in Exposing Relationship Conflicts 
Underlying tensions in your relationship will tend to be exposed dur- 
ing the premenstruum and during menstruation. If you and your 
partner are open to working through difficulties and dedicated to 
working on an honest, open, equal relationship, you can both come 
to deeply value the natural tendency of the menstrual cycle to cut 
156 


[PDF page 169]

BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
through politeness and convention and to reveal problems early—be- 
fore they become major relationship messes. 
Desiring to Be Alone 
As Wendy Alter said in chapter 7, what she wants most is to be left en- 
tirely alone when she is bleeding. Susun Weed, a well-known herbal- 
ist, said, “Visionary states of consciousness are more accessible when 
I am menstruating, if I provide myself with that intention and the 
place where I can freely experience that. I need privacy and quiet and 
not to feel compelled to respond to anyone else’s needs but my own. 
If I have the safe space of the moon-lodge, then I find that it’s easier 
for me to shift my consciousness.”! I have had the same experience— 
that if I can spend some time alone in peace and quiet, insight comes. 
Desiring Closeness 
Some women find that rather than desiring time alone when they 
bleed, they have a greater need for reassurance and closeness. They feel 
vulnerable and in need of cuddles. Women may be more susceptible to 
feeling rejected at this time—particularly in the light of a culture that 
has rejected the bodily processes of the female in so many ways. 
RELATIONSHIPS WITH MEN 
Many women live with a man—a father, husband, son, or boyfriend. 
It’s unusval in this culture to be completely apart from men when we 
are bleeding. So how can the sexes cohabit at a time when, in many 
traditions, women have gone apart from men? One way is by the sexes 
picking up some of each others’ process. This is what is happening in 
sey 


[PDF page 170]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
our contemporary world—the roles that define men and women have 
blurred significantly in the twentieth century. A man who is in touch 
with his “female” side is much easier to be with when you are bleed- 
ing than a man who is very “masculine.” I use these terms with cau- 
tion. Another way of saying this would be that a man who values the 
rhythm of his body and is able to articulate and experience his feelings 
is going to be easier to be around when you yourself are in a deep 
menstrual feeling state. A man who lives more in the traditional mold 
of the male—stoic, cut off from feeling, linear, literal—will be much 
harder to live with if you decide to go further into your menstrual ex- 
perience. 
Many women find that when they delve deeper into the men- 
strual mysteries, they become uninterested in household chores while 
they are bleeding or shortly before. If this is the case with you, then 
it’s going to be crucial how much your partner can pick up your share 
of the cooking and cleaning and child care. 
He needs to be able to take care of himself and also to accept that 
for a few days every month you are taking care of yourself and may 
not be so available. This demands more sensitivity than men have tra- 
ditionally given women in our culture—to be less demanding in terms 
of food, empathy, sex, and social activities. 
This whole business of men picking up a wider range of feeling 
and women going out more into the world may be part of an over- 
all shift in human consciousness away from a rigid experience of the 
self through gender. However, we have to be careful that technology 
and the rapid pace of modern life don’t take us away from our cen- 
ters—away from the knowledge of our bodies. In a male-dominated 
world, women’s reality and experience suffers, and the loss of tribal 
identity and pride in gender manifests itself in the home as much as 
anywhere. 
158 


[PDF page 171]

BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
How well you, your partner, and your bleeding get along together 
depends a good deal on the level of intimacy in the relationship. If you 
are able to talk deeply together about your feelings then you stand a 
good chance of being able to incorporate conscious menstruation into 
your domestic life. Some men enjoy the deepening of relationship and 
awareness that comes from the woman being able to really go into 
herself during her period. One couple I talked to told me that they 
have experienced very spiritual times together during her period in 
which insight has come to both of them. 
Unconscious Misogyny 
If your partner is an unconscious misogynist, this may well show up 
more at menstruation than at any other time because this is a time 
when the woman is most obviously female (and during pregnancy of 
course). Ignoring or despising menstruation is one of the ways that 
misogyny manifests itself. And it’s not only women who create fights 
around menstruation—men do as well. They will do this especially if 
they have a bias against slowed-down dreamy energy, altered states, 
intuition, the release and expression of feelings, and the other states 
that constellate around menstruation. 
Practical Matters 
In my experience, using cloth pads appeals to the practical side of 
men, especially men who are environmentally awake. If your partner 
is repulsed by blood, he may find a pail of bloody cloths soaking in the 
bathroom a little hard to take. There are ways around this of course: 
put them somewhere where he won’t have to step over them, use a 
lid on the pail, and so on. 
159 


[PDF page 172]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
Healing the Battle of the Sexes 
We think of the sexes as being separate and in a way they are. But in 
another way we are all part of the same big human soup, and how 
women view themselves and are viewed affects men too. It might 
look, on the face of it, that men have had the upper hand for the past 
few thousand years, but that is only true from a certain perspective. 
Both men and women have gained and suffered from the imbalances 
of patriarchal society. Men have also been separated from their bod- 
ies and from their feelings and from the pleasure and healing made 
possible by relationships based on cooperation rather than hierarchy 
and dominance. 
Imagine a world in which men and women worked together to 
develop the sense of inner peace that comes from sitting still for a cou- 
ple of days once a month, in which men supported women to spend 
a few days in peaceful quiet. Imagine a world in which menstrual 
blood was once again a magical fluid with a power to nurture new 
life, a world in which menstruation was understood to be the Sabbath 
of women—a natural space within one moon’s cycle for retreat, in- 
troversion, and inner work, from which women emerge like the 
new-born moon itself, renewed, the old skin shed. 
RELATIONSHIPS WITH WOMEN 
There are many instances in cultural lore of women menstruating to- 
gether in synchrony, and many women that I have spoken with have 
reported strange experiences of cycles changing to fit with co-work- 
ers, friends, and lovers. Current research indicates that it is through 
smell—through sensing pheromones—that women pick up on each 
160 


[PDF page 173]

BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
other’s cycles and adjust accordingly. This phenomenon has particu- 
larly been observed in female dorms and in women’s offices, and some 
women notice it in their family too. 
The first time I experienced menstrual synchrony was on a 
school trip to Bavaria. I was fifteen and assigned to a small group of 
six other fifteen- and sixteen-year-olds. For two weeks we traveled 
in the same train compartment and slept in the same hotel room. We 
were rarely out of each other’s sight. We all began our period on the 
same day, about ten days into the trip, and at a time that was off cycle 
for four of us. 
Women often remark on the seeming strangeness of menstruating 
together. We are taught to think of ourselves as individuals, and men- 
strual synchrony is a powerful reminder of our tribal and animal na- 
ture. Menstruating together can be a very bonding experience for 
women, creating an intimacy of being in the same altered state at the 
same time. The knowledge that our bodies shift cycle so that we are 
in harmony creates a feeling of sisterhood that can run deeper than 
our conscious sense of relationship with one another. The idea of the 
menstrual hut, a place where women go to menstruate, 1s very attrac- 
tive to many women. The thought of having some company and 
being “in it together” is appealing. 
Menstruation and Lesbian Relationships 
From talking with women who are in relationships with women, I 
have learned that there are several aspects to menstruating together. 
All the lesbian couples I spoke with have experienced a significant 
level of synchrony—one couple I know begin menstruating within an 
hour of one another. This gives a great feeling of being understood by 
your partner and can be powerfully bonding. On the down side, it 
161 


[PDF page 174]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
can also mean that, as the closely synchronous couple told me, “the 
week before is hell,” as both women have PMS at the same time. Of 
course, this also makes it a potentially powerful time for experiencing 
altered states together and for processing the relationship. 
MENSTRUATION AND THE FAMILY 
A woman’s reproductive years are often dominated by the needs of 
others. Having a time of solitude apart from the demands of the fam- 
ily is a necessary balance. It is a time when the giver can reinforce her 
sense of self and get to know herself away from the needs of the fam- 
ily or workplace. 
Many women find that they become significantly less interested in 
domestic chores, particularly cooking, when they have their period. 
The old taboos that women should not touch food when they were 
bleeding may have had their roots in an earlier awareness that women 
simply don’t want to cook then and from a recognition that this is not 
a time for domestic work but a time for one’s own work. 
For the Deese family of Springfield, Oregon, becoming aware of 
menstrual power has led them to change their family life: 
About two years ago we began to establish a moon-time 
practice of relieving my wife from most domestic chores, 
mostly from food preparation. This brought moon-time into 
the working realities of everyone in the family, by requiring 
some mutual responsibilities that our young ones enjoy. The 
“inconvenience” requires adjustments which are beautiful 
openings for teaching and discussion.” 
For many women, especially mothers, time alone is hard to come 
by. Creating a family pattern whereby mother gets a break when she 
162 


[PDF page 175]

BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
has her period allows a crucial rebalancing to occur. This doesn’t 
mean that menstruating is always about resting, sometimes it’s about 
working and activity too. It is a great time for working creatively on 
what you love best, going for a hike in the woods, writing letters, 
watching the sky. It’s a time for yourself—whatever you want to do. 
Sometimes it is hard for women to get in touch with what they need 
and want for themselves, as so much of their attention is bound up 
with the needs of others, particularly if they have children. Your pe- 
riod is a great time to practice getting in touch with your own needs. 
MENSTRUATION AND THE WORLD 
The Importance of Inner Work for the World 
Why work on yourself? First, if it is in your nature to live the exam- 
ined life, then you will be doing it anyway, and making that exami- 
nation more conscious will enhance your life; your experiences will 
be richer and your sense of self more complete. Second, as the great 
spiritual traditions teach, even one awake individual can create har- 
mony and awareness in the world around her or him. Our inner work 
is also work for the world. Women menstruating with insight feed 
that knowledge into the collective of humankind. This insight can 
also come from nonfocused thinking, and the natural tendency of 
menstruation to provoke a diffused state of awareness means that it 1s 
an excellent time for dreaming and receiving guidance—guidance 
that can inspire and inform the world around us. 
The World Needs Strong Women 
Women need to be tough these days—it is no longer enough to be a 
lady. We have to drive our own cars, earn our own money, take out 
163 


[PDF page 176]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
our own garbage, raise children alone. This toughness and indepen- 
dence has become part of our survival, and it is also something that we 
choose, because it brings us more autonomy in our private lives and 
more power in the world. But in order to survive, and to live our 
power more fully, we don’t have to become tough in the way that 
men are tough. We can use our toughness to draw our own bound- 
aries, state our own needs, create lifestyles that respect our cyclical 
body patterns. We can create a world in which it is a pleasure to have 
a period, in which each is free to menstruate in her own way, a world 
in which the first blood of young women is greeted with joy and 
pride. The world needs our strength—but it needs the strength of 
Women, not the pseudo-strength of pseudo-men. 
Gentling the Workplace 
In general I recommend taking time out from work if you can, espe- 
cially on the first day or two when the bleeding is heaviest. If you 
have to go to work, then take your menstrual energy consciously into 
the workplace. Allow more spaciness, intuition, and slowness in your 
attitude at work. Our workspaces have been too dominated by linear 
thinking, by a striving mentality. Take pride in the state that your pe- 
riod takes you into and change the office—don’t let the office change 
you and create inner anguish, PMS, and cramps. Don’t let people rush 
you; do inner work on your tendency to hurry yourself. 
The world needs the wholeness of women. It needs women with 
healthy wombs who know their own needs and can express their feel- 
ings and their wisdom. One of the ways women keep healthy is by 
taking time out and by honoring their natural rhythms. There is 
growing evidence that working women are hit hard by the stress of 
modern life. There is most probably a link between overwork and 
164 


[PDF page 177]

BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
premature menopause. Under long-term stress the adrenals burn out, 
in turn affecting the pituitary and the thyroid glands and the produc- 
tion of estrogen. When estrogen stops being produced, women go 
into menopause. This is why shock and sudden grief can create pre- 
mature menopause overnight. 
With women suffering from work-related stress, menopause 
doesn’t happen overnight, but it is coming on earlier and earlier. A 
woman working in a high-powered job, in a male reality that doesn’t 
allow for the cyclical nature of female physiology, is under additional 
stress for the few days every month when she would rather be resting 
or puttering about. Instead she carries on just the same, tearing around 
Manhattan or London or Chicago, and as she rushes around while the 
blood drips down, her adrenal glands attempt gamely to cope with the 
stress put on her system by this lifestyle. Chronic fatigue syndrome is 
an illness also caused by adrenal burnout, and the classic patient is a 
woman in her thirties or forties with a demanding lifestyle. 
Is it worth burning ourselves out and going through premature 
menopause in order to fit in with a way of life that is insane as far as 
the female body is concerned? 
The Return of the Feminine and the Healing of the Planet 
We live at a time of increasing awareness of the female, when femi- 
nine values are being returned to the world. The world needs the cre- 
ativity and compassion of women as it may never have needed it 
before. It needs women’s particular and peculiar abilities in drawing 
down of the energy of the universe and manifesting it on the planet. 
Women, by virtue of their biology, have an automatic link to the 
Great Mother. If they choose to tune in to her through their wombs, 
they can access knowledge for the good of all. 
165 


[PDF page 178]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
This increased capacity for self-reflection and insight is not only 
of significance in the life of the individual woman but also for her 
partner and family and the larger community around her. Society as 
a whole unconsciously benefits (and could benefit a lot more) from 
the wisdom garnered by women experiencing their bleeding with 
awareness. By becoming aware of this power and potential, we could 
stabilize our social fabric to a far greater degree. Who knows how 
much disharmony in family life is caused by women not paying at- 
tention to their natural rhythms? The Cherokee recognize that the 
menstruating woman is performing a function of cleansing and cen- 
tering not only for herself but also for her family and, therefore, for 
the whole tribe. 
The changing status of women in society offers great hope for the 
reintegration of female perspectives into mainstream thinking. The 
influence of women is already being felt politically in the ecology and 
peace movements. Menstruation is an integral part of the develop- 
ment of women’s spirituality, both at the individual and collective lev- 
els. For women as individuals, the acceptance of the value and power 
of menstruation is a key to our ability to access the Goddess within. 
Collectively, all aspects of womanhood need now to be acknowl- 
edged for their highest potential. The denial of female wisdom has 
contributed to our present state of hanging on the cliff of potential an- 
nihilation through nuclear warfare, and the threat of destruction not 
only of our own species through nothing short of self-poisoning, but 
also the death of many other species living on the planet. 
It is only a short hypothetical leap to come to the conclusion that 
the denigration of menstruation and the denial of its power arose out 
of fear and envy of that power by male priests and rulers who wanted 
all the power to themselves. Where the battle between the sexes 
originated is open to speculation, and I don’t want to go into that 
166 


[PDF page 179]

BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
discussion here. I prefer to assume that there has been a long-term 
purpose for the evolution of the planet, that it and its inhabitants ex- 
perience patriarchy and the optimal development of culture from a 
male perspective. And it appears likely that before this patriarchal pe- 
riod there flowered a matrifocal culture, which died just as this pre- 
sent culture will die. 
Rather than look back with longing at an imagined golden age of 
Goddess worship, we can look forward to a future where the whole 
of the Feminine and the whole of the Masculine are given the op- 
portunity to flourish. This is a utopian dream, but that doesn’t mean 
it isn’t a good place to aim our sights as a culture. Sometimes we get 
caught in the nightmare of the collective, swept up in horrendous 
news reports of atrocities perpetrated all over the globe, made anxious 
by the knowledge of nuclear weapons testing, the destruction of the 
rain forests, the heartless mutilation of our fellow creatures in the 
name of science. It pays to have a strong positive dream to counter- 
balance this horror, and to be ceaselessly pouring one’s energy toward 
that dream of hope in the future, borne out of the knowledge of the 
essential magnificence of the dance of life and death. 
The return of the feminine and the healing of the planet are in- 
tricately intertwined. We cannot have the change in the macrocosm 
that we know is essential for survival of life on the earth without a 
parallel shift in the microcosm. This has been well understood in the 
issue of recycling, and much of the focus of the environmental move- 
ment has been toward the individual. There is a strong relationship 
between our attitudes to our bodies, and our attitude to the larger 
body—the planet Earth. It is not simply our behavior toward literal 
waste that needs to change, but also our attitude toward our bodies 
and their “waste.” When menstruation is called a curse and suppressed 
or ignored as much as possible, then we are wasting a precious aspect 
167 


[PDF page 180]

HER BLOOD IS GOLD 
of life. We are missing the point that the experiences inherent in the 
female have a value, a value that goes beyond the limits that twentieth- 
century Euro-Western society has allowed. 
Menstruation and the Wisdom Not to Fight War 
The political and social impact of our collective denial of the power of 
the menstrual cycle should not be underestimated. Discovering the 
levels of our disgust at our bodies and at the nature of femaleness is 
unpleasant, but this is vital to unraveling the threads that the patriar- 
chal culture and belief system have wound around our freedom as 
women, as human beings. Our throats have been strangled by these 
cords of self-disgust, as we stand by in horror and watch unnecessary 
wars fought; watch our sons killed and our daughters left without hus- 
bands; watch innocent people killed by bombing and by other hor- 
rendous means. 
Behind this madness is the fact that women don’t believe in 
themselves, and don’t trust their own instincts enough to stand up and 
say, “No. My children will not die in this carnage. You will not de- 
stroy my family, my home, my town, my city, my country.” 
The essential nature of the female is not valued in this culture, and 
so we lack the confidence to stand up and exercise our power because 
we have largely forgotten what female power truly is. It has been de- 
based into manipulation and acting behind the scenes, usually to ag- 
grandize the husband (for example, Nancy Reagan) or acting more 
like men than men do (Margaret Thatcher). 
What Is Female Power and How Could It Manifest in the World? 
One of the ways that female power develops is by the careful gather- 
ing of self-knowledge and awareness through monthly meditation and 
168 


[PDF page 181]

BLEEDING WITH THE WORLD 
retreat at the time of the bleeding. Female power is patience borne 
out of the experiences of gestation and child-rearing: nurturing an un- 
seen embryo for nine months, sitting for hours nursing, rocking a rest- 
less baby in the middle of the night. Female power is female wisdom, 
and female wisdom resides in the body and is manifested as a result of 
the experiences of the female body. 
In a society that does not respect such qualities as awareness, sen- 
sitivity, patience, and ability to nurture, women don’t respect these 
qualities either. They tend to skate with resentment over those times 
in their lives when those qualities could be ingrained into them, if 
they were available to receive them. If all women honored their 
bleeding and went into retreat every month, practicing rituals de- 
signed to increase self-awareness and self-love, the world would be a 
better place. 
Men would discover their nurturing side as they took over the re- 
sponsibility of child care and the home for those few days a month; 
children would be relieved the burden of an irritable and tired mother 
who really would much rather be putting her feet up with a good 
book, and they would also benefit from relating with other adults. 
Above all, the processes of the woman would once again be recog- 
nized as having an intrinsic value. Just as the body miraculously pro- 
duces milk to feed the baby after it is born, so the body somehow 
produces wisdom in the psyche during menstruation—if it is given 
the space. Women don’t have to do anything. In fact the less they do 
the better. It seems to be a case of sitting reasonably still for a while 
and letting it happen. 
If women meditated every month, think how clear their minds 
would be when they emerged from their retreats. The leaders of the 
community should then go to them and ask, “What should we do 
about this or that problem?” and listen to the clear-minded and heart- 
ful response that they would receive. 
169 


[PDF page 182]

HER BLOOD TIS GOLD 
Imagine for a moment, that there is a group of women who are 
nationally, perhaps internationally, recognized for their wisdom and 
for their ability to channel the wisdom of the collective. Perhaps some 
of them are crones who are past the age of menstruation, some of 
them are still menstruating. When there is a crisis, such as an im- 
pending war, these women would be consulted by the political lead- 
ers (perhaps they would also be the political leaders) and they would 
go into meditation (for those still menstruating, during their moon- 
time). The knowledge of what action should or should not be taken 
would naturally emerge from them and would then be given to the 
larger community as a recommendation from the wise women of the 
land. 
At the moment many of our wise women are working in the 
background, exerting what influence they can on a world driven mad 
by materialism and lack of spiritual connection. It is time these 
women came out to the foreground and changed the world. As 
Changing-woman herself spun the web of the beginning of time, so 
now she must emerge to shift the balance of power so that the chil- 
dren of our children’s children will have a world in which to live and 
love. 
170 


[PDF page 183]

Z. 
NOTES 
Chapter 1. A Brief History of Bleeding 
Maria Gimbutas, The Language of the Goddess (San Francisco: 
Harper & Row, 1989); Merlin Stone, When God Was a Woman 
(New York: Harvest/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1976). 
Although the Jewish religion had a long tradition of menstrual 
taboos, these were not common in European culture until the 
middle ages, when Theodore (the author of an influential me- 
dieval penitential) stated that it was a sin for a menstruating 
woman to enter a church and imposed a penance for infraction of 
this rule. G. Rattray Taylor, Sex in History (London: Thames and 
Hudson, 1953), 59. 
Dr. W. C. Taylor, “A Physician’s Counsels to Women in Health and 
Disease,” (1871), in Complaints and Disorders: The Sexual Politics of 
‘Wal 


[PDF page 184]

NOTES 
Sickness, Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English (New York: The 
Feminist Press, 1973), 21. 
Dr. F. Hollick, “The Diseases of Women,” (1849), in Complaints 
and Disorders: The Sexual Politics of Sickness, Barbara Ehrenreich 
and Deirdre English (New York: The Feminist Press, 1973), 29. 
Dr. W. W. Bliss, “Woman and Her Thirty Years’ Pilgrimage,” 
(1870), in Complaints and Disorders: The Sexual Politics of Sickness, 
Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English (New York: The Femi- 
Mist Press311975).29: 
Germaine Greer, The Female Eunuch (London: Paladin, 1971), 
51-52. 
Credit for much of the early work on the appreciation of men- 
struation (in the ’70s) must be given to the pioneering efforts of 
the lesbian feminist community. 
Chapter 2. Moon, Blood, Earth, and Snake 
Elinor Gadon, The Once & Future Goddess (San Francisco: Harper 
& Row, 1989), 2. 
Barbara Walker, The Woman’s Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets (San 
Francisco, Harper & Row, 1983), 669. 
W. Carew Hazlitt, Faiths and Folklores of the British Isles (New 
York: Benjamin Bloom, 1965), 418. 
Wendy Doniger O’Flaherty, Hindu Myths (Harmondsworth, Eng- 
land: Penguin Books, 1975), 89. 
C. G. Jung, Man and His Symbols (New York: Dell, 1968), 276. 
Claudia de Lys, The Giant Book of Superstitions (Secaucus, NJ: 
Citadel Press, 1979), 414. 
172 


[PDF page 185]

10. 
112 
2. 
19: 
14. 
15. 
16. 
7, 
18. 
49; 
NOTES 
Lindsay River and Sally Gillespie, The Knot of Time (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1987), 69. 
de Lys, The Giant Book of Superstitions, 458. 
Hazlitt, Faiths and Folklores of the British Isles, 417. 
“Menstruation and the Power of Yurok Women,” in Blood Magic, 
ed. Thomas Buckley and Alma Gottlieb (Berkeley and Los Ange- 
les: University of California, 1988), 191. 
Penelope Shuttle and Peter Redgrove, The Wise Wound (New 
York: Grove Press, 1986), 284. 
Gadon, The Once & Future Goddess, 6. 
Barbara Walker, The Woman’s Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets, 637. 
Ibid., 644. 
Ajit Mookerjee, Kali: The Feminine Force (Rochester, VT: Destiny 
Books, 1988), 33. 
Walker, The Woman’s Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets, 636-37. 
Shuttle and Redgrove, The Wise Wound, 173. 
Gadon, The Once & Future Goddess, 11. 
Walker, Women’s Encyclopedia, 265. 
Chapter 3. Her Blood Is Gold 
Anne Cameron, Daughters of Copper Woman (Vancouver: Press 
Gang, 1981), 103. 
Ibid., 57. 
“Menstruation and the Power of Yurok Women,” in Blood Magic, 
ed. Thomas Buckley and Alma Gottlieb (Berkeley and Los Ange- 
les: University of California, 1988), 190. 
173 


[PDF page 186]

NOTES 
Cameron, Daughters of Copper Woman, 102-3. 
Ibid., 101. 
Colin Turnbull, The Forest People (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1961), 186-94. 
Chapter 4. The Wounded Woman 
Cervical dysplasia can be a precursor to cervical cancer. It is most 
important to have regular check-ups if you are diagnosed with 
dysplasia, and your doctor will advise you if treatment is necessary. 
This condition should be taken very seriously and surgery may be 
the only viable option. 
Hallie Iglehart Austen, The Heart of the Goddess (Berkeley, CA: 
Wingbow, 1990), 116. 
Chapter 5. Working with Menstrual Symptoms 
. J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion 
(New York: Macmillan, 1957), 792. 
Claudia de Lys, The Giant Book of Superstitions (Secaucus, NJ: 
Citadel Press, 1979), 46. 
Frazer, The Golden Bough, 795. 
Denise L. Lawrence, “Menstrual Politics: Women and Pigs in 
Rural Portugal,” in Blood Magic, ed. Thomas Buckley and Alma 
Gottlieb (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California, 
1988), 122. 
Arnold Mindell, The Dreambody in Relationships (London: Rout- 
ledge & Kegan Paul, 1985). 
174 


[PDF page 187]

40. 
hy 
NOTES 
Tamara Slayton coined the phrase Pre-Menstrual Strength. Per- 
sonal communication, Sebastopol, CA, Dec. 1990. 
Susan M. Lark, M.D., PMS: A Self-Help Guide for Women (Car- 
son City, NV: Self-Help Options for Women, 1990). 
Ibid., 2. 
Ibid. 
Arnold Mindell, Working with the Dreaming Body (London: Rout- 
ledge & Kegan Paul, 1985). 
Dena Taylor, Red Flower: Rethinking Menstruation (Freedom, CA: 
The Crossing Press, 1988), 112. In a study of the menstrual behav- 
ior of 53 American women it was found that: “Nearly everyone 
listed a quiet relaxing activity as what they like to do during men- 
struation e.g. read, stay in bed, be alone, sleep, paint, write, garden, 
take it easy, meditate, take baths.” 
Chapter 6. The Sabbath of Women 
M. Esther Harding, Woman’s Mysteries, Ancient and Modern 
(Boston: Shambhala, 1990), 62-63. 
Robert Briffault, The Mothers, abridged by Gordon Rattray Tay- 
lor (New York: Atheneum, 1977), 253. 
. Barbara Walker, The Woman’s Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets (San 
Francisco, Harper & Row, 1983), 1020. 
Monica $j66 and Barbara Mor, The Great Cosmic Mother (San Fran- 
cisco: Harper & Row, 1987), 189. 
Ann Belford Ulanov, The Feminine (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press: 1971), 176. 
Ajit Mookerjee, Kali: The Feminine Force (Rochester, VT: Destiny 
Books, 1988), 32-35. 
175 


[PDF page 188]

NOTES 
Chapter 10. Rituals of the Moon-Time 
Gary Dale Richman, “The Santo Daime Doctrine,” in Shaman’s 
Drum 22 (Winter 1990-91): 35. 
Chapter 11. Bleeding with the World 
Interview with Susun Weed by Marcelina Martin, 1990. 
Steve Deese and Debbie Heartsong, personal correspondence, 
1991s 
176 


[PDF page 189]

APPENDIX 1 
Questions to Encourage Menstrual Awareness 
Write down three names for menstruation. Think about them. 
What do they imply to you about menstruation? 
Think for a few minutes about what it feels like to have your pe- 
riod (for men or for girls who have not yet menstruated, imagine 
what it’s like), and write down a few words describing that feel- 
ing. 
Next time you have your period, carefully track how you feel 
about yourself. Make notes about these feelings. Do this for two 
or three months and then, one day when you are feeling quite 
steady, look at your notes as if they had been written by someone 
else, someone living on another planet. What is this person’s re- 
lationship with her body like? 
177 


[PDF page 190]

APPENDIX 1 
How does it feel to say, “I have my period?” Can you say it any- 
where without feeling at all embarrassed? 
Imagine you are from another planet. What would you think 
menstruation was if the only information you had to go on was a 
Tampax commercial? 
Imagine if men were the ones who menstruated. How do you 
think they would behave when they had their periods? What 
would the world be like? 
Imagine you have special powers and you can tell when a woman 
has her period. What are the clues that you would use? 
. Just for a minute or two, consider that menstruation is magical. 
What would be the gift of this magical thing? 
178 


[PDF page 191]

APPENDIX 2 
Menstrual Blood and HIV 
There has been a paucity of research about the whole issue of women 
and HIV, and it is not known at the present time if menstrual blood 
is involved in the transmission of the virus. The Centers for Disease 
Control in Atlanta, Georgia, have no documented instances of men- 
strual blood as the means of transmission of HIV. Their spokesperson 
told me that it was theoretically possible to catch HIV from menstrual 
blood, but at the present time this appears unlikely in practice. How- 
ever, like all blood, menstrual blood might be infected with HIV, and 
so we must take suitable precautions. 
We do know that the virus does not live for long outside the body 
because it needs the constant temperature of body heat to survive. 
This means that pads soaked in cold water and then washed thor- 
oughly in hot water should be safe. The FDA did forbid the sale of 
179 


[PDF page 192]

APPENDIX 2 
cloth pads in 1976 (before the onset of the AIDS epidemic), stating 
that they were potentially harmful, but this ruling has since been 
withdrawn, and their sale is legal. 
Where this issue can affect us is in the practice of ceremony in- 
volving menstrual blood as sacrament. As a general rule, if you are 
going to use blood ceremonially make sure that women only come 
into contact with their own blood. 
I feel very sad that we can no longer share our body fluids with 
each other without anxiety. Historically, the sharing of blood in rit- 
ual has been a major factor in bonding individuals and groups, but we 
live in a time where this is no longer safe. 
For more information about women and AIDS see Women, Aids 
and Activism by ActUp and the New York Women and AIDS Book 
Group, published by South End Press (Boston: 1990). 
180 


[PDF page 193]

RESOURCES 
Cloth Menstrual Pad Suppliers and Manufacturers 
Cycles Pads 
Sisterly Works 
RER1, Box 198 
Elberon, IA 52225 
(319) 439-5451 
Ecofem pads, available from 
Personal Hygienic Supplies 
Ganmill Ltd. 
38 Market St. 
Bridgewater, Somerset, U.K. 
TA6 3EP 
Moonwit Pads and Liners 
Moonwit, 
R.R. 4 Lang’s Rd. C-21 
Ganges, British Columbia, Canada 
VOS 1EO 
(604) 537-4683 
New Cycle Products 
Menstrual Health Foundation 
P.O. Box 1775 
Sebastopol, CA 95473 
(707) 829-2744 or 
(800) 845-FLOW 
181 


[PDF page 194]

RESOURCES 
The Rubber Tree Women’s Choice 
4426 Burke Ave. N. #2-360 Bay St. 
Seattle, WA 98103 Ottawa, Ontario, Canada 
(206) 633-4750 KIR 6A2 
(613) 567-2875 
Seventh Generation 
Colchester, VT 05446-1672 
(800) 456-1177 
Classes and Workshops 
Judith Barr Moonlodge Retreats 
Women’s Blood Mysteries Susan Morrison 
P:O; Box552 Nova Quest: Contemporary 
Pound Ridge, NY 10576 Wellness Education 
(914) 533-2373 Blomidon, Nova Scotia, Canada 
BOP 1HO 
Menstrual Health Foundation (902) 582-7369 
Tamara Slayton, director 
POs Boxl7#7> PMS and Menopause Center 
Sebastopol, CA 95473 Susan M. Lark, M.D. 
(707) 829-2744 or 50 Airport Parkway, Suite 151BD 
(800) 845-FLOW San Jose, CA 95110 
(408) 437-4981 
Publications 
The Rag magazine 
Editor: Chris Budeweit 
R.R. 4 Lang’s Rd. C-21 
Ganges, British Columbia, Canada 
VOSIEO 
(604) 537-4683 
182 


[PDF page 195]

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Anthropology 
Beck, Peggy, and Anna Walters. The Sacred: Ways of Knowledge, Sources ss 
of Life. Tsaile, AZ: Navajo Community College Press, 1977. 
Briffault, Robert. The Mothers. Abridged by G. Rattray Taylor. New — 
York: Atheneum, 1977. 
Buckley, Thomas, and Alma Gottlieb, eds. Blood Magic: The Anthro- — 
pology of Menstruation. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California, 1988. 
Cameron, Anne. Daughters of Copper Woman. Vancouver: Press Gang, 
1981. 
Eliade, Mircea. Rites and Symbols of Initiation. New York: Harper & —— 
Row, 1958. 
Ereira, Alan. The Heart of the World. London: Jonathan Cape, 1990. ——~ 
183 


[PDF page 196]

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Knight, Chris. Blood Relations: Menstruation and the Origins of Culture. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1991. 
Lawlor, Robert. Voices of the First Day: Awakening in the Aboriginal 
Dreamtime. Rochester, VT: Inner Traditions International, 1991. 
Mahdi, Louise, Steven Foster, and Meredith Little, eds. Betwixt & Be- 
tween. La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1987. 
Shostak, Marjorie. Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman. New 
York: Vintage, 1981. 
Turnbull, Colin. The Forest People. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1961. 
Goddess Studies 
Austen, Hallie Iglehart. The Heart of the Goddess. Berkeley, CA: Wing- 
bow, 1990. 
Eisler, Riane. The Chalice and the Blade. San Francisco: Harper & 
Row, 1987. 
Gadon, Elinor. The Once & Future Goddess. San Francisco: Harper & 
Row, 1989. 
Betty, Adele. Goddess: Mother of Living Nature. New York: Thames & 
Hudson, 1990. 
* Gimbutas, Marija. The Language of the Goddess. San Francisco: Harper 
& Row, 1989. 
Mookerjee, Ajit. Kali: The Feminine Force. Rochester, VT: Destiny 
Books, 1988. 
Noble, Vicki. Motherpeace: A Way to the Goddess through Myth, Art, and 
Tarot. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1983. 
—. Shakti Woman. San Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1991. 
184 


[PDF page 197]

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
S}66, Monica, and Barbara Mor. The Great Cosmic Mother. San Fran- 
cisco: Harper & Row, 1987. 
Stone, Merlin. When God Was a Woman. New York: Harvest/Har- 
court Brace Jovanovich, 1976. 
Menstruation 
Francia, Luisa. Dragontime. Woodstock, NY: Ash Tree Publishing, 
1988. 
Golub, Sharon. Periods: From Menarche to Menopause. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage Publications, 1992. 
Lark, Susan M., M.D. PMS: Premenstrual Syndrome, Self Help Book. 
Berkeley, CA: Celestial Arts, 1984. (Updated pamphlet on PMS, 
1990; available from the author at the PMS and Menopause Cen- 
ter, 50 Airport Parkway, Suite 151BD, San Jose, CA 95110.) 
Shuttle, Penelope, and Peter Redgrove. The Wise Wound. New York: 
Grove Press, 1978, 1986. 
Taylor, Dena. Red Flower: Rethinking Menstruation. Freedom, CA: The 
Crossing Press, 1988. 
Mythology 
de Lys, Claudia. The Giant Book of Superstitions. Secaucus, NJ: Citadel 
Press, 1979. 
Frazer, J. G. The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion. New 
York: Macmillan, 1922. 
Hazlitt, W. Carew. Faiths and Folklores of the British Isles. 2 vols. New 
York: Benjamin Bloom, 1965. 
Jung, C. G. Man and His Symbols. New York: Dell, 1968. 
185 


[PDF page 198]

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Knight, Richard Payne. The Symbolical Language of Ancient Art & 
Mythology. New York: J. W. Bouton, 1892. 
Graves, Robert. The Greek Myths. New York: Penguin Books, 1955. 
Walker, Barbara. The Woman’s Encyclopedia of Myths and Secrets. San 
Francisco, Harper & Row, 1983. 
Psychology 
Mindell, Arnold. Working with the Dreaming Body. London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1985. 
—. The Dreambody in Relationships. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, 1987. 
—. Working on Yourself Alone. London: Arkana, 1990. 
Women’s Studies 
Ehrenreich, Barbara, and Deirdre English. Complaints and Disorders: 
The Sexual Politics of Sickness. New York: The Feminist Press, 
1973. 
Garfield, Patricia. Women’s Bodies, Women’s Dreams. New York: Bal- 
lantine Books, 1988. 
Hall, Nor. The Moon and the Virgin. New York: Harper & Row, 1980. 
Harding, M. Esther. Woman’s Mysteries, Ancient and Modern. Boston: 
Shambhala, 1990. 
Martin, Emily. The Woman in the Body: A Cultural Analysis of Repro- 
duction. New York: Beacon Press, 1987. 
Raver, Lindsay, and Sally Gillespie. The Knot of Time: Astrology and the 
Female Experience. New York: Harper & Row, 1987. 
186 


[PDF page 199]

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Rush, Anne Kent. Moon, Moon. New York: Random House, 1976. 
Spretnak, Charlene, ed. The Politics of Women’s Spirituality. New York: 
Doubleday, 1982. 
Zweig, Connie, ed. To Be a Woman: The Birth of the Conscious Femi- 
nine. Los Angeles: Tarcher, 1990. 
187 


[PDF page 200]

he , ie wae ah Me oa abe ae dnb ie ie * ; 
PR ur ire OMG Tih ete Al 
: sy i ae 
ee acad Hee ne ire ah a 7 ml ; } imate y's a ‘ 
Mr ae a a” hy i ok Rae Wt id na PRD |e wel Dy aah 1 7 no ee 
| cane we vee “idan surnhe ie hg ER cany, e Be a a iT rie ee ty ae 
eT [-°S! teat. * Hehe pron ii pu) isc i 
Pe ee ae mich wae el Ninh ae ie 1s) a haabi? 
. = & fy Nf 
( aes {24 en at a} Pare J bPie: : re a 
>, , - oe r ae SPAY Ay > ag - i i 
Peal | wii rs Sieg) 4p ,abewoe eae: _ a tbe, i? 7 iia Me rt MeereY Dieta hgh tik wii i 
bre Jie re et . fe ups ==. A) Sey nt ry! Ne: a gad Ray xt ie 
link bigs pane: es Sem 
ee ee | . ‘ . oe a4 ss fi : My awe : Pent ay 
me | i ae ee ne ‘i Ae, ae 


[PDF page 201]

_ 
ne : | re ? a ‘ 


[PDF page 202]

Me: : —) - ‘ ae Wee 2 cbs oe lot. 
nena ve-~ a Ln it : 
sf. SP SMe es ae ; y, he 7 
bm ial F ae 4 
><, = eae | i 
Se We ver” J ea a te 
' uF + aie nt ; iP 4 
i : : i} ; = per A 
7 
; 
Hi 
i 
, 
i 
: = 
Ty 
i 
= 
~ > 
—~ 
} 
a, 
a — 
Sass 
a 
<C 
Sete — 
ss 
_ Se 
i 


[PDF page 203]



[PDF page 204]



[PDF page 205]



[PDF page 206]



[PDF page 207]



[PDF page 208]

NN a tate 
R oe ie. 
a ee ‘ag a} r 
La 
Uk 


[PDF page 209]



[PDF page 210]



[PDF page 211]

\ 


[PDF page 212]

s 
SLLILLSSSS AL» 
Author photo by Andrew Murray 
WOMEN’S STUDIES 
IN MANY TIMES AND IN MANY CULTURES, MENSTRUATION HAS 
BEEN SEEN AS SACRED AND SPECIAL, BUT TODAY, REVERENCE HAS BEEN 
REPLACED BY SILENCE, IGNORANCE, AND PMS JOKES. 
W . V ould we view menstruation differently if men were the ones who 
menstruated? Would, as Gloria Steinem once speculated, menstruation likely become 
“an enviable, boastworthy event”? Would men “brag about how long and how much”? 
Would the onset of the menses be celebrated and respected? 
Incorporating ancient knowledgé¢ | HH | l| NMI | | | | | 
breaks the silence of our cultural taboo a 
r Blood Is Gold 
aim the positive 
power of the female cycle. Drawing on myth, tradition, and the personal stories of three 
women, Lara Owen helps women turn shame, pain, and self-consciousness into 
creativity, self-fulfillment, and healing—for themselves, other women, and the world, 
Offering practical recommendations, rituals, and exercises, Owen describes the physical 
well-being, natural strength, and spiritual insight women can enjoy when they live and 
work in ways that respect their cyclical body patterns. 
Comprehensive, practical, and celebratory, this liberating exploration reclaims 
menstruation as a welcome, natural, even magical time for creativity and renewal. 
LARA OWEN has written about menstruation for the Whole 
Earth Review and is currently a consultant for the forthcoming 
documentary on menstruation, Blood of the Moon. 
HarperSanFrancisco 
Cover design by Amy Knapp 
ISBN 0-06-250641-2 
Illustration by Rik Olson 90000> 
USA $13.00 > 
Canada $17.50 
9°780062"506412 UK £8.99ner HCMG 0293 
ee 
‘y 
wy 
EEE EEE: 
