

[PDF page 1]



[PDF page 2]

Praise for
MOON TIME
This book is a wonderful journey of discovery. Lucy not only guides
us through the wisdom inherent in our wombs, our cycles and our
hearts, but also encourages us to share, express, celebrate and enjoy
what it means to be female!
A beautiful and inspiring book full of practical information
and ideas.
Miranda Gray, author Red Moon and The Optimized Woman
Lucy, your book, Moon Time, is monumental. I cannot tell you how
long I have thought of the very things you are putting forward, and to
see this in print is thrilling.
Moon Time is a well needed resource book covering a wide range
of important ways to respect our blood cycles wisely. Holding our
cycles, bodies, and stages in life with the highest regard breaks the
spell of centuries of oppression where our blood has been considered a
dirty curse. The wisdom in Moon Time sets a new course where we
glimpse a future culture reshaped by honoring our womanhood
journeys one woman at a time.
Cozy up, get yourself a cup of tea and come home as a daughter
of the Red River ﬂowing.
ALisa Starkweather, founder of Red Tent Temple Movement. Co-
author The Red Tent Movement: A Historical Perspective and Women,
Spirituality and Transformative Leadership
Lucy Pearce weaves a moon-web that draws in the many other
women who have written on the subject of menstrual cycles and places
herself as one, amongst others. Her open and accessible book oﬀers
practical, often humorous ideas and encouragement about how we can
tune into our own cycles and ‘dance’ with them in the most creative and
healthy way.

[PDF page 3]

She is one of the special whisperers, who helps us to remember
our own power and sacredness as played out in our cycles. Through
her writing she initiates a dialogue with her readers. Her writing
empowers her readers to have a voice to respond. This is a remarkable
gift to us.
Tracy Evans, PhD researcher, women’s rites of passage,
University of Aberystwyth
Moon Time is a beautifully written resource for deepening your
connection with your cycle. Full of personal heartfelt suggestions,
simple rituals and practical ways to support women in understanding
the inﬂuence their hormones have on them each month.
This book could change your life!
Rachael Hertogs, compiling editor of Thirteen Moonsand author
Menarche: A Journey to Womanhood

[PDF page 4]

Other books by the same author
Moon Time: harness the ever-changing energy of yourmenstrual
cycle
The Rainbow Way: cultivating creativity in the midstof motherhood
Moods of Motherhood: the inner journey of mothering
Burning Woman: an initiation to feminine power
Anthology Contributor
Earth Pathways Diary 2011–16
Musing on Mothering mothersmilkbooks.com (2012)
Tiny Buddha’s Guide to Loving Yourself Hay House (2013)
Roots: Where Food Comes From and Where It Takes Us:
A Blogher Anthology (2013)
If Women Rose Rooted, Sharon Blackie (2016)
She Rises: Vol. 2 Mago Books (2016)
Also from Womancraft Publishing
The Heart of the Labyrinth – Nicole Schwab
Moods of Motherhood: the inner journey of mothering– Lucy H.
Pearce
Moon Time: harness the ever-changing energy of yourmenstrual
cycle – Lucy H. Pearce
The Other Side of the River – Eila Kundrie Carrico
The Heroines Club – Melia Keeton-Digby
Burning Woman – Lucy H. Pearce
Liberating Motherhood – Vanessa Olorenshaw
Moon Dreams 2017 Diary – Starr Meneely
Dirty & Divine – Alice Grist
The Goddess in You – Patricia Lemos and Ana Alonso

[PDF page 5]

Moon
TIME
harness the ever-changing energy of your menstrual cycle
Lucy H. Pearce
WOMANCRAFT PUBLISHING

[PDF page 6]

Moon Time: harness the ever-changing energy of your menstrual
cycle
© Lucy H. Pearce 2012, 2015
First published 2012Second edition 2015
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including
photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods,
without the prior written permission of the publisher, except in the case
of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non-
commercial uses permitted by copyright law.
Cover art by Elena RayTypeset and design by Lucent Word
www.lucentword.com
Extended quotations used with the express permission of
their authors.
The advice contained in this book is provided as information only,
not formal medical or contraceptive guidance. It is recommended that
you seek further professional advice.
Second edition published by Womancraft Publishing, 2015
www.womancraftpublishing.com
ISBN: 978-1910559-062 (paperback) ISBN: 978-1910559-079
(ebook)

[PDF page 7]

OOO
For my mother:
I am me,
Because you were you.
OOO

[PDF page 8]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Welcome to the second edition of Moon Time, just over three years
after its initial publication.
I am honoured and delighted that this little book, my ﬁrst, which
was initially written as a small personal project, has been received with
so much love and gratitude by women around the world.
It was this book that made me an author...and publisher. That
women who did not know me trusted me enough to buy it was
miraculous to me. That it has become the consistently #1 bestselling
book on menstruation on Amazon.com is beyond my wildest dreams.
It has brought me into contact with the leading ladies in the world
of women’s health and for that I am profoundly grateful. It has brought
me speaking and teaching engagements. And with each I have built my
understanding of menstruation, red tents and emergent women’s
culture. These are exciting times we are living in, and I am so honoured
to have become part of this movement.
Each week I am moved to receive emails from readers around the
world expressing gratitude for this little book. ‘Life changing’ is an
expression I hear quite regularly, and one I am always humbled by.
I wish to thank all those who have supported my writing and my life
as they have unfolded:
My mother, Francesca, for giving me life, and making me who I
am.
My father, Stephen, for providing the template for making a living
from honouring your creativity. And for creating and sharing the tea
house where this book was ﬁrst written.
My grandmothers, Lucy and Suzanne, who shaped me more than
they could possibly know, and whose physical presence I miss deeply,
but whose spirits are always by my side.

[PDF page 9]

My step-mother, Lauren: part mother, part sister, part friend, but
as far from wicked as it’s possible to get!
My sister Mirin, for blossoming into the young woman I always
wished I had been, right in front of my eyes.
My best school friend, Emma, with whom I shared the news of my
ﬁrst bleeding and the joy of my ﬁrst birth, as well as many other secrets
along the way.
My women’s group: Amy, Meadhbh, Delphine, Louise, Mary,
Sharon, Leigh and Loo for holding the container of our collective womb
within which we have all grown.
My soul sisters: Tracy, Mary, Leigh, Laura and Paula. For seeing
me as I am—and celebrating that with me.
The many, many open-hearted, shining souled women and men I
have met on this journey of writing and teaching—whose insights,
appreciation, and experiences have helped me to grow.
My treasured readers at Dreaming Aloud and Juno and tribe of
inspirational women on Facebook who helped me to develop the cover,
subtitle and resources section for this second edition.
ALisa, Miranda, Lorraine, Rachael, Nicholas, Isadora, Shawn, Zoë
and Dawn for their beautiful work and generous, open-hearted
permission to reproduce it in this book. Your blessings for my work
have touched my soul.
My husband, Patrick, for his technical prowess—everything I don’t
know how to do, he does—we make a good team! For supporting my
women’s work and creativity, for being open to sharing working and
childcare, for keeping me sane and helping me to laugh over the years,
I am incredibly grateful. You truly are my soft place to fall.
And ﬁnally to our three children: Timmy, Merrily and Aisling, for
their patience with me when the Crazy Woman roams, my

[PDF page 10]

distractedness when a creative project is gestating, as well as for their
love and the fun that we share. I am so glad to be your mother.

[PDF page 11]

INTRODUCTION
Welcome, dearest woman.
I am so glad you’re here. Are you ready for an adventure? The
location isn’t a far-oﬀ land, but somewhere much closer to home: your
beautiful body. And your compass is your menstrual cycle.
Despite having inhabited them our whole lives, our bodies can
often feel very foreign to us. We can feel out of control, at the mercy of
our own hormones, never knowing whether we’ll be full of energy or
curling up in a ball, exhausted and aching.
Our female bodies are quixotic—our energy levels, moods and
physical health constantly changing. It can feel disorientating and
frustrating. But what’s worse is there seems to be little support or
acknowledgement of this reality. We’re supposed to just ignore it all
and carry on regardless.
It is my guess that no one ever initiated you into the path of
womanhood. Instead, just like me, you were left to ﬁnd out by yourself.
Little by little you pieced a working understanding of your body and soul
together. But still you have gaps.
You yearn for a greater knowledge of your woman’s body, a
comprehensive understanding of who you are, why you are that way.
Perhaps you have searched long and hard, seeking advice from
your mother, sister, aunts and friends, tired of suﬀering and struggling
alone. You may have visited doctors, healers or therapists, but still you
feel at sea and your woman’s body is a mystery to you.
Or maybe you have never given your cycles a second
thought...until now.
Perhaps you are seeking...
O deeper harmony with yourself and your cycle
O greater self-knowledge and self-acceptance
O to better understand your fertility and make new contraceptive choices

[PDF page 12]

O to improve your experience of ‘that time of the month’
O a way to balance your hectic life and your body’s needs
O to heal your womb
O to harness your ever-changing energy to improve your creativity, working life or
relationships
O positive language to describe your body and its functions
O a practical guide to creating a red tent or moon lodge
O natural ways of dealing with PMS
O ideas for celebrating the next part of womanhood that you, or your daughter, are
entering
O a greater physical connection to nature’s cycles, seasons and the moon
This book will help you with all these and more.
Through knowledge we gain power over our lives.
With options we have possibility.
With acceptance we ﬁnd a new freedom.
Why our cycles matter
We start bleeding earlier today than ever before, with girls’ ﬁrst
periods occurring at 12.8 years old now, compared with 14.5 years at
the beginning of the last century. Coupled with lower breastfeeding
rates, better nutrition and fewer pregnancies, women now menstruate
more in their adult lives than at any time in our history.
Menstruation matters.
From the age of 12 to 51, unless you are pregnant or on the pill,
every single day of your life as a woman is situated somewhere on the
menstrual cycle. Whether ovulating or bleeding, struggling with PMS or
conception, our bodies, our energy levels, our sense of self, even our
abilities are constantly shifting each and every day.
And yet nobody talks about it.

[PDF page 13]

Everyone just ignores it. Women are expected to be the same, day
in, day out. Despite the fact that our bodies are cycling through the
various parts of the menstrual cycle.
Just keep calm and carry on.
As girls we may have been taught to look out for our ﬁrst blood.
And told what to use to absorb it. But after that: silence. Hide it, ignore
it...and make sure no one notices.
And so we think we must be a little crazy as we experience these
massive ﬂuctuations every month. Unless we’re lucky enough to have a
close girlfriend who shares her inner world with us. But many of us
don’t. And so we are alone in our bodies.
Take what works...and leave the rest
This book walks on tender ground. Each woman comes to it with
her own sensitivities and unique experiences, her own pains and pre-
conceptions. Not everything here might be resonant with you. Perhaps
you are just beginning the journey of self-acceptance, just starting to
learn about your body’s cycles. Or perhaps you have been studying
them for years and are seeking resources to help you dig deeper into
yourself, to empower you to share your journey and wisdom with other
women in your community.
Whatever your starting point, whatever your background, I honour
you, and want this book to be deeply accessible and acceptable to you.
When we come across new ideas which challenge the way we
have learned to see the world and ourselves we can be triggered. We
can feel judgement, shame, anger...The new information is like a red
ﬂag: either it must be wrong...or we must be wrong. Most of us don’t like
to be wrong. It makes us feel threatened and unsafe.
I want you to feel safe, my love. And I want you to learn and grow
too. That’s why you picked up this book.

[PDF page 14]

So if I suggest something which doesn’t sit well with you, I invite
you to examine it:
O Is it uncomfortable to you simply because it is a new idea?
O Is it something you have been taught to reject or disapprove of?
O Is it something which you feel others might judge you on, or ridicule?
O Is it something you have tried and know you don’t like?
O Or are we coming from diﬀerent assumptions or understandings?
To thine own self be true
As you work through this book, be true to yourself. I cannot lead
you towards self-knowledge. Only you can do that. I can oﬀer candles
and matches. But you must light them.
Let this book sow the seeds—and then explore the ideas further:
Google them, ask friends and practitioners, question them, try them out
in your own life and see if the ideas and activities ‘grow corn’ for you.
Do they work? Do they heal you? Do they help you feel more connected
to yourself, and to the people in your life? If so, then they are good and
right for you.
If I suggest something that you hate then rather than just reacting
against it, ask yourself: what about it feels wrong for me? What would
be a more acceptable, exciting alternative for me? And then go make it
happen. Go create your own uniquely wonderful path to healing
and wholeness.
It is my deepest wish to help you to celebrate you, your body and
help you to reconnect with your female rhythms. This book oﬀers you
hundreds of diﬀerent ways in. All it takes is one to start you on your own
path, or unblock the way.
Start small
With much of this women’s work, because it goes against the grain
of what we have been taught in our culture, many of us ﬁnd that it is
easier to start small and private, whilst we are still learning and

[PDF page 15]

growing. There is less vulnerability, less opportunity to shame
ourselves or be shamed by others in our early experiments. Others
need the support and encouragement of a group of like-minded women
as they explore these new terrains. Again, do what works for you.
Take your time.
Be gentle with yourself,
and all those that you meet on the path.
Remember that you are not alone. All around the world, over two
billion women are travelling this path: silent sisters of the moon.
Through this book you will learn how to kindle your own wisdom ﬂame,
and share it together with your daughters and sisters and communities.
You will ﬁnd ways to celebrate and support each other, break our
silence about what it means to live in a woman’s body in this world.
So here we are, at the beginning of our journey together, to explore
the mystery of being a woman.
OOO
My journey
I always ﬁnd it helps on a journey to know a little about my
companion and where she has come from, so that we can travel in trust
and ease together.
I am the mother of three children (currently aged nine, seven and
ﬁve). I have been working in women’s work for the past nine years,
running women’s circles, mother blessing ceremonies and holistic birth
preparation classes. I helped to set up a women’s group and red tent
here in my area. I have written on women’s issues (natural pregnancy,
birth, motherhood, moon time, creativity and health) for nearly a decade
in my career as a freelance writer, author of four books, blogger and
contributing editor at Juno magazine.

[PDF page 16]

Whilst many of my credentials are quite alternative, and many
chalk me down as ‘New Age’, I am not, if truth be told, that comfortable
with anything too ‘out there’. For me everything must be ﬁrmly grounded
and integrated. The thrust of my work is, and always has been, to bring
what works from alternative circles back into the mainstream, to
integrate wisdom with science and to make it accessible to all.
I have been on this journey of menstrual exploration for 15
years now.
My initiation was at 20, struggling with being on the pill and hating
it. I came across the book Women’s Bodies, Women’s Wisdom which
set me on a path of curiosity and discovery about my own female body.
That book has changed my life many times over.
That was the beginning. But my embodied transition to awareness
really happened as a result of gestating, birthing and breastfeeding
three children. There is nothing like being caught in the endless cycle of
procreation for seven years to put you in touch with your body and how
it works!
Coming back to my periods after prolonged breaks each time gave
me a chance to be more reﬂective and aware of them rather than
simply reacting to them. I began to see how my body and its fertility
impacted my creative and sexual energies, through pregnancy, post-
partum and my cycles. I began to connect the dots in my personal
experience—dots that my culture had never even told me were there.
I became aware from ﬁrst-hand experience of the power of my
womb to create, hold and give birth to life. I understood its function. The
point of periods was no longer abstract, and my sexuality was not just
for fun, or limited by fear of pregnancy. As I witnessed this ﬁrst in
myself, and then in the women I worked alongside, I developed an ever
greater sense of gratitude and compassion for myself and all women.

[PDF page 17]

As well as a sadness that this wisdom is not acknowledged or
supported in our culture.
I have many diﬀerent moods to my physical and emotional life, and
so I have learnt to celebrate them rather than ignore them. To co-create
with them rather than resist them. This truly has been a wonderful
journey, which has impacted my work, life and relationships in so many
ways.
And I am still learning. Still uncovering new depth and insight—
through my lived experience and in books. I am an apprentice to my
body. Some days more successful than others! Often I get impatient
and push and force myself. I ignore what I know and everyone suﬀers—
me, my husband and kids. I feel like a slow learner. But then I look
around me and almost all the women I know of my age, and older, are
in this place of learning. And I remind myself to be gentle and
compassionate with myself, not to shame myself. Because we are not
initiated into what it means to become a woman.
OOO
What does it mean to be a woman?
Despite coming from a loving home, I was sensitive to a lot of
messages to do with being a woman that went unspoken (and
unchallenged) in the world at large. These were the things I learned
subconsciously from our culture about being a woman.
 
(Why not tick oﬀ those which are true for you too!)
O To be a woman is to be less than. That’s why we aren’t represented in anywhere near
equal numbers anywhere—from history books, to the halls of government, to TV comedy
shows. And why lots of the insults you can call someone are female too.
O Women’s bodies are unreliable.
O Women have a lot to be ashamed about. Body hair, imperfect bodies, aging...If you’re
not perfect hide it away, don’t talk about it, be silent and for goodness’ sake be discrete.

[PDF page 18]

O If you really experience serious pain (and are not just imagining it or attention-seeking)
then go to a doctor to help you silence your symptoms.
O Wombs cause pain, that’s what they do, they’re faulty objects to be tolerated or
removed. Stop moaning and get on with it.
O Women bleed. Menstruation is embarrassing, dirty, taboo, shameful and unclean.
O The menstrual cycle is an irrelevant inconvenience and certainly not of any relevance
or importance to us or our world.
O Women are weak, unreliable and over-emotional especially when they are ‘on the rag’.
This is a valid topic for multiple smutty jokes.
O It is preferable to avoid menstruation. It is a problem which most women would like to
be rid of.
O Periods prevent us from being fully functional or rational, and so unable to play roles of
importance in a man’s world.
O Don’t get pregnant! (Until you’re 30).
O Or why can’t you get pregnant? (If you’re over 30).
O Mothering is not an important or valued role.
OOO
Throughout the book you will ﬁnd ‘AND YOU?’ sections which
invite you to reﬂect and respond, to apply what you have read to
yourself. Perhaps you would like to note answers to the questions
brieﬂy in your journal. Perhaps some call you to a longer, more detailed
response. Or maybe you just want to answer them in your head as you
read. As with the rest of this book, do what works for you!
And you?
What does it mean to you to be a woman?
What were you taught...and what have you learnt
through experience?
Which of these lessons are true for you?
Are there any more lessons that you would add?
Which of these do you still believe or live by?

[PDF page 19]

Which have you rejected?
How do you feel about your cycles at the moment?
How has this evolved over the years?
There is little understanding and allowance for the realities of being a
cycling woman—let alone celebration.
But that changes here!
Take my hand...Let us begin!

[PDF page 20]

OUR CYCLES:
A BIOLOGICAL UNDERSTANDING
How much did you learn about your menstrual cycle in school?
Most of us learned about our female biology in science classes, from a
detached perspective—full of big scientiﬁc words and abstract
diagrams—which often felt like it had little to do with us.
We are not taught in school about the experiential aspects of our
cycles, or the spiritual and intuitive gifts of menstruation. Before we dive
deeper into the wisdom of our cycles, we ﬁrst need to make sure that
we’re all on the same page about what actually happens to our bodies
during the menstrual cycle. Understanding the biology and physiology
of our cycles is the ﬁrst key to acceptance and living in balance with all
the processes that go on unseen within us.
Each month our bodies go through a series of changes, many of
which we may be unconscious of. These include: shifts in levels of
hormones, vitamins and minerals, vaginal temperature and secretions,
the structure of the womb lining and cervix, body weight, water
retention, heart rate, breast size and texture, attention span, pain
threshold...
The changes are biological. Measurable. They are most deﬁnitely
not ‘all in your head’ as many would have us believe. This is why it is so
crucial to honour these changes by adapting our lives to them as much
as possible.
We cannot just will these changes not to happen as they are an
integral part of our fertility.
Menstruation
O Day one is the ﬁrst day of bleeding. The bleeding occurs when the nutrient-rich womb
lining disintegrates and is shed because no egg has been implanted.
O This usually lasts four to six days getting lighter in the ﬁnal couple of days.
O Only an egg-cup full of blood is lost, but it looks like a lot more!

[PDF page 21]

O If you are taking the pill, the bleeding that you experience is not a menstrual period but
simply a withdrawal bleed from the artiﬁcially induced state of quasi-pregnancy that the
hormones create.
Pre-ovulation
O Oestrogen increases leading to the development of the egg follicles, stimulation of
breast tissue and the uterine wall.
Ovulation
o At ovulation time (around day 12–16) usually just one egg is released from one of your
fallopian tubes (they tend to alternate each month).
o You will notice a change in your discharge around this time. You will most likely feel
very wet, and your underwear will be damp from the discharge which is clear and
stretchy like egg white. It can often feel like you have just got your period. You will most
likely feel sexier. If you are wanting to get pregnant, now’s the time!
o The egg becomes a corpus luteum producing both oestrogen and progesterone in
preparation for fertilisation.
Pre-menstrual
O The pre-menstrual stage can last for six to ten days before bleeding starts.
O If fertilisation does not occur the corpus luteum degenerates and the levels of
progesterone and oestrogen both fall.
O This change in hormones can lead to PMS symptoms.
O Most women have a second window of sexual excitement either just before or
during menstruation.
O There is a biological need for increased REM (dreaming) sleep from day 25 onwards.
O Most women report that their sleep is aﬀected by their menstrual cycle, being worst in
the three days before bleeding and continuing into the heaviest bleeding days.
Many women have regular cycles of around 28 days, though others
might have cycles of varying lengths (14–40 days), and periods of

[PDF page 22]

varying lengths (3–7 days). What is most important is that you know
what ‘normal’ is for you.
Our cycles can be impacted by stress or illness. If you have had a
stressful month, don’t be surprised if your period is late.
Some women naturally have shorter or longer cycles their whole
lives, however if:
o your periods are very irregular
o you have a lot of mid-cycle spotting
o your period is very light (pale pink and watery)
o it is extremely heavy
o it contains lots of clots
o PMS symptoms are incapacitating
o you are struggling to conceive
I do recommend that you visit a practitioner—both your doctor, and
perhaps an acupuncturist or herbalist—to help you to establish a
rhythm. This is especially important if you are wanting to chart your
cycles either to avoid pregnancy or to ﬁnd out your peak fertile time.
Irregular cycles and the other issues mentioned can be
symptomatic of an underlying health issue that needs to be addressed.
Menstruation and breastfeeding
There is little common knowledge about the interaction between
menstruation and lactation, perhaps because at the time when much of
the scientiﬁc research on menstruation was happening in the West,
breastfeeding levels were at their lowest since humans’ emergence on
the planet.
o Prolactin, the major hormone which enables breastfeeding, suppresses fertility. This
natural pause to the cycles is called lactational amenorrhea. Some women use this as a
contraceptive technique, known as the Lactational Amenorrhea Method (LAM). It is only
recommended whilst the baby is being nursed exclusively, is under the age of six months

[PDF page 23]

and menstrual bleeding has not returned. For more see
www.waba.org.my/resources/lam/
o Extended periods of lactational amenorrhea result in lower rates of breast, ovarian and
endometrial cancers.
o Fertility may reappear anything from four weeks after birth to over three years. With
mothers who breastfeed exclusively, it is usually over six months, and often over a year.
o The ﬁrst periods may occur without ovulation, but equally fertility might reappear
without menstruation, and with no obvious signs to alert you.
o It is completely possible to conceive whilst breastfeeding. However, some women
might need to cut down feeds or stop feeding altogether to ensure a return to full fertility.
o Breastfeeding aﬀects the vaginal secretions (due to low oestrogen) so mucus charting
can be ineﬀective. Be sure to use your temperature if you are charting your fertility
naturally.
o Readjusting to your menstrual cycles after pregnancy and feeding can be a gradual
process, with periods taking a while to establish their regular rhythm.
o Return to menstruation can be accompanied by emotional upheaval including: grief,
depression, exhaustion. It may also bring renewed energy, a rise in your libido and a
feeling of ‘being back to yourself’.
Menopause
The most powerful force in the world is a menopausal woman
with zest.
Margaret Mead
Menopause refers to the last menstrual period. It occurs at some
point between 40 and 55 years old, with the average being 51 years. It
is considered conclusive when you have 12 months without a period.
o Pre-menopause can last ten years. During this time the ovaries gradually stop maturing
eggs and releasing large amounts of hormones.
o Peri-menopause refers to the few years before and one year after the ﬁnal period where
symptoms are usually apparent. Progesterone levels begin to decline. Although you may
have seemingly normal menstrual periods, they begin to occur without ovulation

[PDF page 24]

(inovulatory cycles). Without adequate progesterone, oestrogen becomes the
dominant hormone.
o This leads to the onset of well-known menopausal symptoms: hot ﬂushes, night sweats,
mood swings, insomnia, vaginal dryness, lack of sex-drive, weight gain and irregular
periods. And to lesser-known ones: breast tenderness, headaches and heavier,
prolonged menstrual ﬂows.
o Post-menopausal women need to take extra care of their bone and
cardiovascular health.
o Due to the increasing amount of oestrogen-mimicking, hormone disrupting chemicals in
our foods, the water supply, plastics and other products we use on a daily basis, women
are experiencing oestrogen dominance much earlier in life than in the past. It’s now not
unusual to notice symptoms of menopause in your late thirties. This does not necessarily
mean that you are about to experience menopause. Have your hormone levels checked,
and ask a practitioner about supplementing with natural progesterone.
Just as our culture demonises menstruation and birth, menopause has
also been simultaneously silenced, trivialised and made a terrifying
prospect. During her medical residency, Dr Eve Agee noticed that
women with persistent menstrual problems also tend to suﬀer more
during menopause. A fact which on the surface seems self-evident, but
because of the way our medical system specialises so heavily, womb
issues may be dealt with by a number of diﬀerent specialists over the
course of a woman’s life: from menarche, through childbirth and
menopause, and the dots may not be joined. Therefore it is key to heal
your menstrual cycles now, whilst you still have them, so that your
transition through menopause is a smoother ride.

[PDF page 25]

THE WISDOM OF OUR CYCLES
By being true to all sides of your nature, you acknowledge that you
can be self-conﬁdent, active and strong, that you can nurture without
being weak, that you can be wild and instinctual as well as calm and
reasoning, and that you have a beautiful darkness within, a depth
beyond the mundane world.
Miranda Gray, Red Moon
We have mentioned our ‘cycles’ quite a lot now in passing. And
sometimes we forget the meaning of the word. A cycle is the basic unit
of life: birth, growth, transformation, decline and death, followed once
again by birth. It is a circular, repeating journey. A process of expansion
and contraction, which is echoed in the pulsations of the womb, the
beating of our hearts, the in and out of our breath. Cycles can be
observed in every life form on the planet, in the seasons and the
phases of the moon. Our menstrual cycles connect our female bodies
directly to nature.
Our cycles ensure that we do not live static lives. Instead they
demand that we live dynamically, constantly exploring the diﬀerent gifts
of feminine power that each portion of our cycle holds. Part of learning
the art of being a woman is learning to honour each element of our
cycles and ourselves.
The menstrual cycle is, in the words of Alexandra Pope, ‘our inner
guidance system, initiating us into and anointing us with ever
deepening revelation and wisdom.’ In the next few chapters I will share
the ways in which we can tune into this guidance system, and grow in
our own cyclical wisdom.
So let us delve deeper into what it means to be a cycling woman.
Let us examine the intricate interweaving of our bodies, hormones and
psyches which make us the women we are.
Dancing in the dark

[PDF page 26]

Our menstrual cycle takes us each month on a journey between
the light and dark in a spiral dance. Each month we get another
opportunity to dance in a diﬀerent way, to interact with our rhythms and
tune in through our bodies. When we are unskilled or unprepared, we
may stumble, falling over our own feet and everything that lies in our
path.
But as we gain conﬁdence in ourselves and sense our own rhythm
we begin to dance to our own tune. We sense when the energy shifts
and rather than resist, we follow its lead.
The movements of the cycle are like the breath catching, like the
snagging of threads in a garment. A sudden shift in gear, a cloud
scudding across the sun, a small irritation, a distraction. Quiet, subtle,
demanding your attention. Tripping you into diﬀerent realities,
perspectives and understandings. Breaking the mould of the cultural
mind set. Stopping you from becoming an endless doing machine.
Reminding you of yourself and making you sensitive to the world.
Alexandra Pope The Wild Genie: The Healing Power of
Menstruation
A cycle
As a way of illustrating the dynamic journey of the menstrual cycle,
what better way than to share with you one of my own cycles? Rather
than impersonal diagrams I present you with a personal narrative in the
hope that you might recognise elements and patterns, which had
previously gone unnoticed in your own life.
Day One
For the past couple of days I have known that my moon time is
approaching. It has felt like a storm is building—internal pressure
growing until I felt I would burst. I have been irritable, on edge, my belly
has felt fat and blobby. I hate my clothes and my body. I just want to be
left alone.

[PDF page 27]

The moon has gone and the nights are really dark. As I was putting
the children to bed, I wanted them to hurry up and be gone. I found
them too energetic. I needed the smooth, slow darkness of my own
mind. I wanted to be alone with my thoughts, to sink into them like a
warm bath. Once they were in bed I felt drawn to my journal and
silence.
My moon time blood feels like sweet relief. Like the storm clouds
breaking and the rain pouring down after a drought. It takes all my
energy with it. I feel hollow and empty, like I have nothing left to say or
give, and it feels like the world is pouring out of me. I lie or sit all the
time, with no desire to go for a walk or do anything energetic. I just
need to be quiet and alone in this dreamlike state.
Day Two
Last night I dreamt of blood and terrifying strange men. My dreams
feel as real as waking life at this stage: vivid and powerful. They stay
with me all day.
My bleeding is still heavy, but I am hit with a surge of energy. If I
am not careful I quickly overdo it. It doesn’t take much to make me
exhausted—rather like during pregnancy. I have to remember to pace
myself otherwise I will be pretty much bed-ridden with exhaustion for
the next couple of days.
Days Three and Four
My bleeding is easing up little by little, and as it does my energy
returns more.
Day Five
With my bleeding virtually gone I feel back to myself and renewed.
I feel the need to purify, to cleanse my body. I always have a sacred
bath at this point, a literal washing away of the smell and feel of
menstruation. It is a time for sloughing oﬀ dead skin and old feelings, to
break fresh and clean into the new cycle. I don’t like having baths

[PDF page 28]

during my moon time so it always feels like a real treat to have one to
mark its end. I luxuriate with a rose candle, bubble bath and steam
rising up.
Days Six to Nine
It feels so good to be more energetic. I want to be out in the world.
Ideas start to ﬂow...and the energy to see them through. My emotions
feel clear and fresh. My libido starts to rise again. My heart energy
rises, I want to be close and aﬀectionate, where only three days ago I
desired nothing more than to be alone and untouched. It feels so good
to be alive.
Days Ten to Twelve
My energy is soaring. With the clear ﬂow of my ovulatory phase I
celebrate with my sexual being. This is the fertile time, when all my
children were conceived. It is a time for creativity—with body and soul. I
have so many projects that I want to start right now! I invite friends
round for an impromptu party and we stay up chatting till late.
Days Thirteen to Sixteen
Full moon is here and with it my ovulation—I feel deeply connected
to the openness of the moon. I feel lit up. I also feel a little crampy at
this time of the month. I go for a walk on the beach and watch the moon
rise over the sea, soaking up the bright moonlight, and give thanks for
all I have.
My energy feels clear and ﬂowing, I am focused and creative and
have huge amounts of energy—I could take over the world right now! I
enjoy nourishing myself and my family, and entertaining friends. I ﬁll my
fridge and freezer with meals to sustain us when I no longer feel
like cooking.
Days Seventeen to Nineteen
I notice my energy levels starting to lessen—I am between the
worlds, neither ovulatory nor pre-menstrual. I feel on edge, I check my

[PDF page 29]

calendar to see when I am due … surely it can’t be that long.
Days Twenty to Twenty-three
I feel like I am starting to sink down. Things become more of an
eﬀort. I notice my patience getting shorter and I get upset more easily.
Days Twenty-four to Twenty-seven
A tireder, heavier energy emerges, I feel sluggish, and everything
is an eﬀort. I am spaced out and can’t concentrate on things which
earlier in the month I would have ﬂown through. I feel tired. Really tired.
I bawl in front of a soppy TV program. I growl about my husband’s
imperfections in my head. I snap impatiently at the kids in the morning
rush, then burst into tears straight afterwards. I am craving sugar.
Nothing feels right. I would really just like to curl up like a cat in a cosy
chair in front of a roaring ﬁre, and not be bothered. I feel like I’m coming
down with ﬂu: tired, aching bones and belly, and hot and cold ﬂushes. If
I let myself have time alone, if I let myself really express what is wrong
and let it out, I feel much better.
Day Twenty-eight
I need to be nurtured. I need warming food, a blanket round my
shoulders and to curl up in bed early. So I do. I put on a nourishing
women’s summit broadcast and soak in gentle feminine wisdom. My
absolute need for chocolate reaches a crescendo in the week before
my period. It is so strong: a dark, comforting warmth that soothes me. It
drives me nuts that I can’t eat it because of migraines.
I have also noticed that in the few hours before my period I
suddenly become sexually alert and responsive, just as I do at
ovulation. I am alive, let’s celebrate with sex! And then these feelings
totally disappear for the next ﬁve days.
And you?
How much of this sounds familiar to you from your own cycle?
And where does your cycle diﬀer?

[PDF page 30]

The archetypes
Our cycles have four major phases, which can be interpreted as
corresponding to the four main female archetypes (or energy patterns)
and stages of life.
The Virgin/Maiden
The Virgin self emerges after the menstrual bleeding has stopped,
and the fresh new womb lining grows.
She is full of innocence, energy and potential. She feels good in
her body—ﬂirtatious, sexy and lighter after the dark days of her blood
time. Her ability to conceive and gestate are just emerging and are still
unproven. At this point in her cycle she feels free from her menstrual
pull—she is a virgin in the traditional sense of the word—a woman unto
herself.
The Mother
The time of ovulation and possible conception is represented by
the mother who has the ability to nurture new life. Her fertile womb
space is warm and soft. At this time a woman tends to feel loving and
enjoys giving of herself fully, either by becoming a mother to a child, or
in her career, creativity or home-making. Ovulation symbolises the
ability to give and sustain life and the full ﬂourishing of a woman’s life.
The Enchantress/Wild Woman
The pre-menstrual stage is a descent from the light, outward stage
of our cycle and into the dark, inner stage. Progesterone and oestrogen
dance together to create dynamic swings. The Wild Woman dances a
magical path between huge bouts of creativity and emotional storms. In
time you learn how to harness this powerful energy, knowing when to
destroy, how to express your righteous anger, and when to go within
and reﬂect.
The Crone/Wise Woman

[PDF page 31]

The Crone emerges during the late pre-menstrual and bleeding
time. She can be a Wise Woman or a destructive Witch depending on
how she handles this time. Her mood darkens and she becomes pulled
inward, becoming quieter, more reﬂective and more in touch with the
dream time. She is less ‘in the world’ and in need of more rest. She has
no need to please others, and lives according to her own inner wisdom
and guidance. This time has many gifts for a woman and her
community, if she can learn to retreat and allow her visions to emerge
from her depths, trusting her wisdom.
OOO
We live in a culture which worships the Virgin, her nubile body and
budding sexuality. One which side-lines the Mother, not celebrating or
honouring the acts of gestation, birth and childrearing. A culture which
fears the power of the Enchantress, which turns away from the wisdom
of the elders and does not know the value of reﬂection and dreams.
In order to reclaim our full selves, to integrate each of these
aspects through which we pass over the course of our lives, we must
ﬁrst learn to embrace them though our cycles.
We need to take time to honour the part of ourselves that mothers
and nurtures; the part of us that yearns to be girlish, free and self-
deﬁned; the wise woman who watches in the wings full of wisdom and
the erotic enchantress who can bewitch and create magic. Our cycles
allow us to take on these roles, to live these hidden parts of our
psyches.
Our cycling nature gives us constant teasing tastes of the whole
gamut of womanhood, and our life cycle, month after month. It also
ensures that we deal with emotions which we might otherwise avoid:
anger, sadness, conﬂict, grief and eroticism.
We are always much more complex, much wiser than we give
ourselves credit for; our potential much greater than we dare to hope

[PDF page 32]

or dream.
Creating your archetypes
Many esoteric and mystical traditions consider the womb to be a
crucible of creativity: sexual, reproductive and artistic. It has been
identiﬁed with the ‘holy grail’ of myth and legend, a magical, life-giving
cup of rejuvenation and knowledge. Throughout the book I will oﬀer
suggestions of how you might tap into your innate, embodied creativity
in your womb space.
If the archetypes in this chapter resonate with you, then why not
bring them to life for yourself? The following exercise will help you to
integrate their diﬀerent energies further into your life.
The exercise is divided into a couple of stages—the ﬁrst step is
connecting internally with the energies and emotions connected to each
archetype, then visualising these in your mind’s eye in terms of colour
and symbol, before representing them creatively.
You do not need to be a professional artist to have a go. It is about
building your understanding of the diﬀerent energies as represented by
the archetypal characters. Your intention needs to be expressing the
basic energy of each phase of the cycle—your representations do not
need to be ‘perfect’, they are your unique expressions of your personal
understanding. If you really, really freak out at the idea of putting brush
to paper, then just do this as an active visualisation, taking yourself
through the steps in your head.
Take what you learn from it and apply it into your physical
experience of your cycle—dress in the colours that resonate with you at
that time of the month, move in the way that you associate with that
archetype, integrate your intuitive understanding of each archetypal
phase into your daily life.
Materials

[PDF page 33]

First you need to choose the art materials that you wish to work
with—something which allows quick work is better, as this is
responsive, intuitive work—so if you choose paints, then I recommend
acrylics, gouache or watercolours, not oils. Clay feels lovely between
the ﬁngers for a tactile, sensual experience. Pastels (chalky ones, not
oil pastels) are great for beginning creatives as they are soft and
forgiving. You can cover a lot of space quickly with them and if you are
unhappy with something you can rub it out with your ﬁnger. For exercise
one I recommend that you choose one medium (i.e. paint, pastel, clay)
to create the whole series, so that you have a complete cycle and you
can see how the energy alters the identical materials.
Set up your space
Make it somewhere where you can work undisturbed. Or if you are
working alongside your children (as I often do) make it clear that you
are working on your special project and they are working on theirs.
Ensure that they are settled with their work before you begin.
Have all the materials you will need to hand and make sure
surfaces are protected. Switch oﬀ your phone. You may want to light
incense or smudge the space with sage. Perhaps have some music
which feels sacred to you—choose it according to the energy you are
working with. This project can take place over the course of a month.
Or it could be a moon time project.
Centre yourself
Before you start your work, centre yourself with a few deep,
mindful breaths. Place your hands on your belly, breathe in and out,
bringing your attention to your womb. Bring your attention to where in
your cycle you are. Have to hand the Integrated Menstrual Chart (see
p46) as a reference.
Visualisation

[PDF page 34]

Concentrate on the archetype and answer the following questions
instinctively, without excessive rationalisation and logical thought. There
are no right or wrong answers—this is your interpretation. You can jot
down your ideas if it helps:
O What colours do you associate with this archetype?
O What natural forms?
O What objects?
O What physical posture?
O What energy levels?
O What symbols?
O Where does she live?
O With whom?
O How does she wear her hair?
O What clothes does she wear?
O How does she move?
O What animal might she be?
O What element do you associate with her?
Exercise one—full series
In this exercise you will create a series of four pictures, each
worked quickly and intuitively to express the archetypes. You will need
four pieces of paper, one for each archetype.
You will be starting with the Virgin/Maiden. Pause for a moment,
settling into your body. Hold the key words which resonate with you
about her in your mind as you work, keeping in mind the season, her
element etc.
Then pick a colour and start to work, quickly and intuitively.
After ten minutes move onto the Mother. Again, sit with the
archetype for a few moments ﬁrst, welcoming her energy into your
body. After another ten minutes move on to the Enchantress and ﬁnally
the Wise Woman.

[PDF page 35]

Step back and behold them, now you have the series, see if there
is anything that you want to highlight about their similarities or
diﬀerences. In this way you will produce a series of pictures in under an
hour. Finish by taking a few minutes to write in your journal about any
insight that came to you in the process of creating these archetypes.
Exercise two—cycle project
You can also work more deeply, throughout the course of a cycle.
For this variation you commit to one hour (roughly) at each phase in
your cycle. Still yourself and tune into the energy that is coursing
around your body at that moment. Really feel it. And then take that onto
the paper. Paint or draw yourself in this phase—what colours best
express your mood, are you dynamic or still, what posture feels right
to you?
Exercise three—branching out
Another time, perhaps you will choose to drum, dance, write
monologues or poems, make a quilt or puppet, a piece of jewellery, or a
self-portrait photograph for each diﬀerent phase of your cycle.
Giving expression to these energies is fulﬁlling and insightful and
can only lead you to greater self-knowledge.
If you are a professional artist, it might also lead you into some
deep, personal works which profoundly touch the women who
see them.
and you?
Have you ever thought how your creativity is connected to your
womb?
How much does your creativity express your experience of living in
a female body?

[PDF page 36]

PUTTING THE MOON BACK INTO MENSTRUATION
Everything that ﬂows moves in rhythm with the moon. She rules the
water element on Earth. She pulls the ocean’s tides, the weather,
female reproductive cycles and the life ﬂuids of plants, animals and
people. She inﬂuences the mood swings of mind, body, behavior
and emotion.
WeMoon Diary
That the 28-day menstrual cycle correlates closely with the moon’s
cycle, as well as the fact that women living in close proximity cycle
together, are some of the more mysterious elements of the menstrual
cycle which science and the world at large seem to have little interest
in. But once women are aware of this, it adds an extra dimension to
their appreciation of the intricate sensitivity of their bodies to the natural
world around them. It is truly remarkable that the pull of a distant
astronomical body has such an impact on our own small selves.
Our connection to the moon might seem at ﬁrst glance to be a
rather esoteric belief, but science now backs it up.
A growing understanding of ecology and feedback systems has
led us to see that every living organism is in constant contact with its
surrounding environment and continuously inﬂuenced by it.
We tend to think that our biological rhythms are independent of the
environment, but many of them were originally acquired through
interaction with the outside world. It is not by chance that women’s
menstrual cycles and the moon’s phase correspond, any more than it is
coincidence that all people have built in diurnal rhythms of
approximately the same length. At one time moonlight and sunlight
actually controlled such functions directly but through evolution these
rhythms have become incorporated into our biological systems.
Prof. Kerstin Uvnas Moberg, The Oxytocin Factor: Tapping the
Hormone of Calm, Love and Healing

[PDF page 37]

There is increasing evidence from research on people and animals
alike that the destruction of biological rhythms has implications for an
organism’s health and general well-being. Our bodies were born on this
Earth, programmed by our genes and enculturation to be tied to the
sun’s daily rhythms for waking and sleeping—and the moon for our
menstrual cycles and subconscious life processes.
It has been proven that the full moon has a strong negative impact
on the quality of sleep, regardless of whether the moon is visible or not.
Many professionals attest to the very real inﬂuence of the moon on
human behaviour in their work. Teachers will tell you that their students
are more unruly and ‘wired’ at full moon. Many police forces in the UK
and US ensure higher staﬃng levels on full moons, in anticipation of
extra violence. Casualty admissions often spike. And midwives are
aware that the full moon seems to trigger labour in many
pregnant women.
The inﬂuence of the full moon has been observed for centuries and
is where we get the word lunatic from—meaning somebody who
experiences temporary or heightened insanity at full moon. Current
research shows an increase in schizophrenic and epileptic episodes at
full moon time.
We are not the only species inﬂuenced by the moon—corals
spawn, wolves howl and turtles lay eggs at the full moon. Tides are
higher. Traditionally farmers planted and harvested by the moon’s
cycles as well, and many still use these principles to guide their growing
practices.
Phases of the moon
The moon is constantly changing in appearance—her shape and
size determined by her position relative to the sun that illuminates her.
Not only does she change in appearance, but also when she rises and
sets. The moon rises in the east and sets in the west each day.

[PDF page 38]

The moon has a cycle of approximately 29.5 days. On months
where there are two full moons in a calendar month it is called a blue
moon—hence the phrase ‘once in a blue moon’ as it is a reasonably
unusual occurrence. A super moon is when the moon is at its closest
point to Earth and appears noticeably larger in the sky—this is
considered to amplify its inﬂuence upon people and nature.
The following is a simpliﬁed version of the moon’s phases and the
energetic properties of each.
Full Moon
Full moons rise at sunset and set at dawn. They are energising—
sometimes in a good way, at others creating agitation, making sleep
and relaxation hard. Full moons are a time to harvest and sow, a time to
entertain and celebrate, to work late and create wholeheartedly.
Each full moon has its own special name and characteristics. For
example the full moon which falls at some time in mid-August through to
mid-September is called the Harvest moon—it tends to seem
particularly golden and full, and its light was used to harvest by.
Waning moon
Waning means getting smaller. When the moon reaches its
halfway point (the last quarter moon, which rises around midnight)
there is a sense of balance, tension or transition. It continues getting
smaller each night, until it is completely dark.
The dark moon or new moon
For a couple of days the moon is almost invisible, it is a time of
darkness. The moon is in shadow and rises before dawn and sets with
the sun. Many traditions use this as a time of inwardness, reﬂection,
visioning and setting intentions for the month ahead. It is a time of new
beginnings, a seeming pause in the darkness before its journey back to
fullness again.
Waxing moon

[PDF page 39]

The moon gets a little bigger and brighter each night, moving
through the crescent moon—the moon of story-books, the small sliver
which speaks of hope, new life, magic. At halfway (the ﬁrst quarter)
again there is a sense of transition or balance, the moon is visible in the
afternoon and sets in the evening.
Many cultures run on lunar calendars, but ours is solar. To learn
more about the moon’s phases, get yourself a calendar or diary with the
lunar cycle in it. Make a conscious eﬀort to check the sky every day,
and mark the days of your cycle onto your calendar so you can see how
your menstrual cycle and the phases of the moon interact.
Our personal moon cycles
The most common menstrual pattern is to bleed on the dark moon
and to ovulate at full moon, this is known as the White Moon Cycle.
Before the advent of electric light in the late nineteenth century,
women’s ovulation was primarily activated by their hormonal response
to the brightness of the full moon at night. In our modern era however,
street lighting, domestic electric lighting, artiﬁcial hormones, pollutants
and stress have contributed to women’s cycles being more staggered
throughout the month, with some bleeding rather than ovulating at full
moon (known as the Red Moon Cycle), and many others unconnected
to the moon’s cycles at all. Women who have charted their cycles and
experienced menstruation at dark and full moon report feeling more ‘in
ﬂow’ and ‘attuned to themselves’ when they bleed on the dark moon.
In the wonderful book Alchemy for Women, Penelope Shuttle
makes brief reference to the Wise Woman Cycle—a menstrual pattern
which alternates every three months or so between White Moon and
Red Moon Cycles.
This has been my pattern, since getting my moon time back after
having my third child. It is slightly disorientating feeling—one month
being in sync with the energetic pull of the moon—bleeding on the dark

[PDF page 40]

moon, feeling naturally introspective and in need of retreat, and then
ovulating and having high energy at the same time as the moon is at its
fullest (and the children are at their most hyper!) Menstruation at full
moon three to four months later is quite a diﬀerent dynamic, and the full
moon energy makes resting harder, but acts to strengthen the visioning
and creative powers which come to the fore during this part of our
cycle. This constantly shifting cycle within the cycle, means you are
always kept on your toes, having to adapt. It gives new insights into
your own cycle and the moon’s cycle, and the subtleties of their
various combinations.
There is little information available about the Wise Woman Cycle,
and so I asked a number of the leading women in the ﬁeld of
menstruation, most of whom had not come across it either! I loved
Sophia Style’s insight:
After ten years of sharing our menstrual cycles in women’s circles,
I have also seen this pattern repeated many, many times, and in myself
(although not always as clear as every three months!)
My feeling is that the dark moon and the full moon are powerful
magnets for our menstruation and that our moon time, for most women,
tends to journey from one to another. It feels very diﬀerent either way
(the speciﬁc insights and experiences also vary from woman to woman
from what we have shared). To experience both kinds of cycles so
regularly, and the diﬀerent wisdom that each brings (from deeply
inward to intensely open and all kinds of permutations in between) in a
conscious way, is no doubt a Wise Woman Cycle.
Celebrating full moon
Cultures around the world celebrate the full moon and its vibrant
energies in diﬀerent ways—from full moon parties on Thai beaches to
Jewish family feasts.

[PDF page 41]

Whilst celebrations tied to the moon are often associated with
Pagan and Wiccan traditions, more mainstream religions also use the
moon to guide their feast days. In the Christian tradition the date of
Easter changes each year, according to where the full moon falls. The
Jewish calendar is rooted in the cycles of the moon, Rosh Chodesh is
marked each new moon and Yom Kippur Katan is celebrated the day
before, as a day of fasting and penitence in preparation for the new
month ahead. The Islamic festival of Ramadan begins on the day after
new moon, and ends on the sighting of the next month’s crescent
moon.
Calendars in many Asian countries are lunar based. The most
important Buddhist celebrations, Vesak, Sangha Day and Dhamma
Day are all celebrated on the full moon. In Hinduism the moon cycles
are considered very powerful, and devotees will fast on both the full and
new moons of each month. Diwali is celebrated on the new moon and
Holi on the last full moon of winter.
Creating your own full moon celebrations
Spending time out in the bright light of the full moon is a magical
experience, even for the most cynical of us. If you are looking to realign
your menstrual cycle with the moon’s cycle so that you have a White
Moon Cycle, exposure to the full moon light can have a very powerful
eﬀect. Many women who have tried the ‘lunar realignment’ of their
cycles have contacted me reporting great success.
For those of you who enjoy deepening your physical connection to
the moon, here are some of my favourite energising full moon activities.
O Full moon circles that gather to celebrate the full moon—often for women only, the
participants dance and co-create rituals and ceremony.
O Moon bathe! Go outside and feel the electric glow of moonlight and chill on your skin,
take your shoes oﬀ, perhaps even your top in mid-summer! Feel the dew beneath your

[PDF page 42]

feet. Put a blanket on the grass if it is damp and lie on your back, looking up at the moon,
the stars and the vast expanse of the heavens.
O Celebrate the full moon and the rise in your fertility and desire with your partner—or
alone. Dance together, make love, have a moonlight picnic and frolic in the dew.
O Enjoy a sensual moonlight swim or moonlight stroll.
O Open your curtains and sleep in the bright moon light.
O As you walk through your house turning oﬀ your lights before you go to bed, take a
moment to gaze up at the moon through your window, and allow yourself to breathe and
be fully present.
O Try Moon Essences which help you attune to the qualities of the full moon energy—
these can be purchased, or try steeping herbs or crystals in water in the light of the
full moon.
New moon celebrations
The new moon is a time of sowing seeds and visioning what we
desire in the month ahead.
O Create a red tent or moon lodge and sit in circle with other women.
O Attend a sweat lodge.
O Take time to sink into your intuition using practices that you love.
O Vision your month ahead in your journal as a quiet, introspective practice.
A moon time myth
Other cultures and other times have had diﬀerent understandings
of the female body, its innate rhythms and wisdom. Other cultures have
honoured the menstrual blood as wise, the moon as a powerful force
and the ability to give birth as a miracle.
The following story is one from the Native American tradition,
retold by one of their elders, Nicholas Noblewolf. It tells of their
understanding of the signiﬁcance of a woman’s moon time, and how it
should be respected by all, as a precious gift from Grandmother Moon.

[PDF page 43]

A long time ago, women did as they do now—they held the family,
they held the power (life-force) for the family, they held the happiness
and joy, they held the sorrow and disappointments. After time, the
negative emotions and heartache that the women took upon
themselves on behalf of their families would begin to weigh them down.
The women would become sick and ﬁnally, could no longer take on the
burdens of the family. Yet the nature to do so had been imbued into
them by Creator.
One day, a woman was out in the forest, crying because the
burden had become so great, when Raven heard her and asked,
‘Mother, why do you cry?’
The woman responded, ‘I love my family so very much. I hold my
family in my heart and soul, but the pains of life have ﬁlled me up. I can
no longer help my family. I can no longer take their burdens from them. I
just don’t know what to do.’
Raven responded, ‘I understand the pain you feel, as I feel it also. I
will go and ask Grandmother Ocean if she knows what to do.’ So
Raven ﬂew to the ocean and shared with Grandmother the plight of
the women.
Grandmother Ocean responded, ‘If the women will come to me, I
will wash their pain from them, but this won’t help the ones who are far
away. Let me ask my sister, Grandmother Moon, if she can help.’
So Grandmother Ocean spoke to her sister of the women’s plight.
Grandmother Moon responded, ‘I am the power of the feminine. I will
send into the women, my sisters, your waters carrying my power. Once
every moon cycle, you shall come into the women through me and
purify them.’ And, she did this. So ever since then, every woman has a
time each moon cycle when she embodies the power of the moon and
ﬂows the cleansing of the ocean. We call this the woman’s time of the
moon, or moon-time.

[PDF page 44]

It is each woman’s responsibility to take the time when she is in
her time of the moon to purify. It is the responsibility of the men to give
the women the opportunity to do so.
Nicholas Noble Wolf, www.nicholasnoblewolf.com
This story was taken from an article ﬁrst published in Sacred Hoop
magazine 2000. It is republished here with the author’s permission.

[PDF page 45]

CHARTING YOUR CYCLE
Our bodies are in constant, rhythmic change, but because so
much of this is happening beneath our waking consciousness, we can
feel out of control, or ‘all at sea’. When we begin to notice the pattern of
these cycles, their repetitive nature, their connection to nature beyond
us, we can begin to feel not like victims unprepared for the weather, but
like adventurers of days gone by, who navigate by nature—the pull of
the tides, the placing of the stars and the gathering storm clouds.
Often we can feel overwhelmed and confused by the seeming
turbulence of our bodies and unpredictability of our moods. If this is
you, then I thoroughly recommend charting your cycle for a few months,
to get a deeper understanding of how your body and moods change
throughout your cycle. This will help you to navigate your life from an
inner stability, and an awareness of your own unique ebb and ﬂow.
There are many ways to keep track of your cycle:
O marking the expected date of your period in your diary
O using an app on your phone
O charting symptoms for fertility awareness (see next chapter)—to aid conception or
contraception
O charting symptoms in a journal for healing PMS
O keeping a moon diary—where you chart your symptoms alongside the moon’s phases
O using a moon dial
O or perhaps a moon bracelet, often called a mala or lunar time piece
(For stockists of all of these see the Resources section at the end of the
book.)
I have been charting my cycle for many years, in diﬀerent ways:
O scientiﬁcally as a natural contraceptive method, noting the changes in discharge. (NB
this produced two surprise babies for us!)

[PDF page 46]

O to give insight into my PMS, noting what foods, events and parts of my cycle were in
need of attention and healing
O directly into my diary, both with moon cycles and without, to see what impact and
correlation the moon has on my cycles
O my dreams and how they connect to my cycle
O sometimes in a more descriptive form, as you saw earlier
Each method reveals insight into your changing, cyclical self, by
recording the tiny details which we tend to overlook, or if we do notice
them we forget exactly when they occurred. Charting shows us
physiological and emotional patterns over the course of the month, and
makes us more mindful of our eating, self-care regime, energy levels
and fertility.
OOO
And you?
Have you charted before? Which aspects worked, and which
didn’t?
What kind of charting calls to you?
What do you want to understand more about? PMS, fertility,
your moods?
Using a moon dial
A moon dial gives a great reminder of the repetitive, cyclical nature
of your menstrual cycle and is particularly helpful for visual learners.
The moon dial can be an interactive journey of discovery of oneself in
relation to the moon’s own cycles. Through exploring and aligning these
cycles we can create liberation by balancing our whole being.
With your moon dial you can:
O note the phase of the moon relative to your cycle
O place the date next to each day to keep track easily
O note physical symptoms, general health, energy levels, activity and dreams

[PDF page 47]

See my video on The Happy Womb on how to use a moon dial. There
are a few diﬀerent versions that I have come across—see the
Resources section at the back of the book for stockists.
If you can’t get or make a dial, why not start a moon diary? Each
day of your cycle note down a couple of words about your emotional
state, energy levels and any physical symptoms to begin to see the
course of your moon journey that your hormones and body
are following.
Dream charting
Another key way to gain insight into our menstrual cycles is
through dream charting. This is something I learned from the fabulous
book, Alchemy for Women by Penelope Shuttle. I highly recommend
seeking out a copy to learn more about it.
It was a revelation to me that our dreams alter according to our
menstrual cycles. Images that might occur at ovulation include: a clear
river, babies, small animals, eggs, balls, images of pregnancy or birth,
erotic dreams. Whereas dreams that tend to occur approaching
menstruation include: blood, red images (red ﬂowers, red clothes),
being wounded or bleeding, also dark haunting dreams of death, being
pursued by a dark man. The threshold points, when we move from
ovulatory to pre-menstrual and pre-menstrual to bleeding are often
accompanied by particularly powerful and vivid dreams. What is even
more fascinating is that our menstrual cycles can aﬀect our
partner’s dreams!
Charting our dreams—writing down what we remember of them as
soon as we awaken—gives us a profound insight into the crossovers
between our bodies and minds, and our subconscious world. Often
when reﬂecting on these dreams we can ﬁnd wisdom for our
waking lives.
Integrated menstrual chart

[PDF page 48]

On the following pages you will ﬁnd the biological, archetypal,
spiritual and emotional cycle wisdom I have compiled in this book in a
simple chart format, condensing the ideas into a clear reference tool.
You could photocopy it and keep in your journal or pin it on the wall
by your desk as a reminder of your ever-changing self. You could
illustrate it, colour it or laminate it...
It is yours to use in the way that supports you best. My deepest
wish is that it will guide you in your journey of self-discovery.
You will ﬁnd a full-colour version to download for yourself or share
with your friends on my website www.thehappywomb.com
  Pre-ovulatory Ovulatory
Moon
Phase Waxing Full
Archetype Virgin/Maiden Mother
Season Spring Summer
Element Air Earth
Light Lightening Full bright light
Length 9 days 5 days
Hormone Oestrogen Rising oestrogen
and progesterone.
Physical
Egg follicle ripening—
stimulating breast
and womb.
Egg released from ovary into
fallopian tube, becomes corpus
luteum. Uterine wall built up in
preparation for fertilisation.
Vaginal
Discharge Sticky/none Clear and stretchy, like egg
white. Very wet feeling.
Emotion Calm, open, dynamic,
clear, energetic,
Loving, nurturing, nourishing,
sustaining, energised,
connected.

[PDF page 49]

enthusiastic, able to cope
with irritations.
Energy Rising dynamic—
growing outward.
Full, sustaining—losing sense of
self in work or mothering.
Pre-menstrual Menstrual
Moon
Phase Waning Dark
Archetype Enchantress/Wild Woman Crone/Wise Woman
Season Autumn Winter
Element Fire Water
Light Darkening Dark
Length 9 days 5 days
Hormone Falling oestrogen
and progesterone. Progesterone
Physical Transition time. Womb lining breaks down and
released from uterus.
Vaginal
Discharge
None/blobby, thick and
yellow
Bleeding—starting out bright
red, becoming browner
towards the end.
Emotion
Creative,
emotional, sensitive,
angry.
Introspective, dreamy,
sensitive, intuitive,
spiritually connected.
Energy
Waning dynamic—
destructive,
descending inward.
Reﬂective, slow, containing,
internalised, spiritual.
  Pre-ovulatory Ovulatory

[PDF page 50]

Libido Rising, carefree.
Full, horny, height of
libidinous desire around full
moon/ovulation.
Physical
feeling Energetic
Perhaps ovulatory pain/
cramping, sometimes mid-
cycle spotting, food
cravings, horny,
sensitive breasts.
Outward
action
Start projects—clear
visioning and energy raising.
Fresh start. Organise
and prioritise. Clear out—
spring cleaning. Catch up
with things that have slipped
during menstruation.
Work hard, love well—birth
creative projects, stay up
late!
Harmony with nature
and other mothers.
Receptive to other’s input.
RelationshipsEasy-going, trusting, out-
 going.
Loving, giving, nurturing.
Reach out to friends,
children, family
and partner.
Key words New beginnings, dynamic,
exuberance, self-conﬁdent.
Fertility, radiating, caring,
nurturing, committed.
Aﬃrmation I step forward in action with
a lightness of heart.
I embrace my life with love
and generate beauty
around me.
Pre-menstrual Menstrual
Libido Peaks and troughs—can
be very intense.
Often a sexual peak just
before bleeding occurs, or

[PDF page 51]

just after. Little desire
during menstruation.
Physical
feeling
Lowered immune system.
Towards the end:
cramping, back ache,
bloating, tiredness, tender
breasts, sugar and
carbohydrate cravings,
hostility, mood swings.
Greater need for rest and
dreaming sleep. Cramping,
back ache, migraine,
faintness,
exhaustion, tearfulness.
Outward
action
Finish up projects. Begin
to reﬂect and assess. Take
action dealing with issues
and problems.
Turn your focus to
inner-directed creative
projects and listen deeply
to your intuition.
Retreat, dream time. Only do
what is essential. Do not
take on any new projects.
Delay important decisions or
stressful appointments.
Slow down, tune in
deeply to your intuition and
rest well.
Relationships
Needs to balance dynamic
interactions with others,
with focused, energised
creative time alone.
Desires to be alone or in
quiet communion with other
women—does not want to
be around men and children!
Key words Magical, witchy,
destructive, intuitive.
Darkness, wisdom,
gestation, stillness, vision.
Aﬃrmation
I use the sword of my
intolerance to cut deep
and true. I keep hold of my
vision and manifest it.
I sink into my depths and
listen to my dreams.

[PDF page 52]

OUR FERTILITY
Fertility spans the arc of womanhood—menarche–menstruation–
birth–menopause. Whether we intend to birth or not, have gone through
menopause or not, fertility is the arc of womanhood.
Lorraine Ferrier, natural fertility expert
Our periods are often looked at in isolation from our fertility and
feelings about fertility. In my own personal experience, and that of
women that I know, how we feel about getting pregnant majorly
impacts our attitudes towards our moon time and our bodies. It shifts
and changes according to where we are in our fertility journeys.
Our culture has a rather warped view of fertility: it’s considered a
bad thing...until some point in your thirties, where you then ‘should’
have babies (the right amount, in the right way, with the right partner
and spacing and not too many) before a cut oﬀ period where you
deﬁnitely ‘should not’ have them.
Let’s have a look at the archetypes of our fertility, and then at how
we can build our fertility awareness.
Fertility and the four phases of womanhood
Virgin
For younger women who dread the inconvenience of pregnancy,
and just desire to be free and easy in their bodies, like they were as a
pre-teen and as boys their age are, a period is a major inconvenience
to be ignored or resented. This is the time when we often go on the pill,
use tampons and struggle with the worst elements of PMS—the
monthly hormones exacerbating teenage issues like acne, body issues,
greasy hair and mood swings. This is a time when we neither value nor
desire our fertility, and therefore often reject our periods.
Mother
For women wanting to get pregnant but who are struggling, a
period often means a failure, the lack of fertility, and with it grief, anger

[PDF page 53]

and despair, exacerbating PMS.
For a woman who is breastfeeding the return of her cycles means
extra tiredness to her already overused body, a sense of being
swamped by a baby when she needs space to bleed. It can also mean
the return of the anxiety about fertility, and if and when another baby
is desired.
Enchantress
For women who have given birth and/or are reasonably at peace
with their family size, many of these issues are gone and the monthly
period gives a reminder of the miracle of the bodily cycles which helped
to create her children. But it also creates a time of disharmony when
she is required to care for children and needs to retreat.
Crone
For an older woman, each missed period gives a reminder that her
years of fertility are behind her and that a new stage of life awaits. It
may be the ﬁrst time that her sexuality is totally unfettered by her
fertility. But it can also be an unwelcome reminder that she is ageing.
The way that she perceives older women and death can impact her
experiences profoundly.
There are more post-menopausal women alive today than have
ever existed before on our planet. In many cultures the grandmothers
are deeply honoured and respected. In the past to reach old age was
unusual—to survive early childhood, childbearing, accidents, disease
and warfare and reach the age of 60 would be a major achievement
and one that few would attain. To have survived that long was a
blessing, a sign that wisdom and fate had combined in your favour. To
traverse the inner journey of menopause, a death of fertility before
physical death, and enter into another life—a life unto oneself, no longer
beholden to oneself or community as a life giver, but choosing to
support, teach and nurture—was a position of respectability.

[PDF page 54]

OOO
Medicated moon time
The most common form of contraception for women is the
contraceptive pill. It is considered by many doctors and women to be a
panacea—promising easy contraceptive protection with the added
bonus of decreased menstrual discomfort and acne. Many women start
taking it in their teens and continue for years unquestioningly, happy to
not have to really deal with their cycles.
Many women don’t realize that when you are on the pill you are
actually suppressing menstruation. The contraceptive pill does not give
you a natural bleed, it’s what is called a breakthrough bleed and is due
to chemical withdrawal. It is not a period at all. The pill works by fooling
your body into thinking you are pregnant, it thickens cervical ﬂuid
making the vagina inhospitable for sperm and also prevents you
ovulating. In my experience many women are not told this when being
prescribed the pill, so are unaware.
Lorraine Ferrier
I have not taken the contraceptive pill for years. It was only when
leading a workshop last summer, that I realised the extent of women on
the pill.
I asked the 30 women to stand in a formation according to where
they were in their cycles, placing the moon dial mandala in the centre of
the room, and brieﬂy explained the four archetypes of the menstrual
cycle. What I thought would be a simple task was anything but. Many of
the cycling women did not know where they were in their cycles. But the
majority of the women aged 16 to 30 were on the pill. ‘Where do we
come on the moon dial mandala?’ they wanted to know. ‘What is our
archetype?’ Good question!
The truth is: I don’t quite know. They are in the Virgin part, in the
sense that they are pre-motherhood, they are in the Mother section, in

[PDF page 55]

that their bodies are being hormonally tricked into thinking they are
pregnant. But they are in the Enchantress archetype in terms of libido
and mood. The pill is an artiﬁcial state of being. And sometimes we
forget that. We forget how new it is in human culture, and to our bodies.
I remember that ‘not-quite-one-thing-nor-the-other’ feeling all too
well. Like many girls of my generation and the next I went onto the pill
very early on, before I had gotten a real sense of my libido or my cycles.
My moon time in my teens was hard. Not only did I have the mood
swings of teenage girlhood and PMS, but my period pains were so bad
that I would often faint in the ﬁrst couple of days of menstruation. I
would be writhing in agony, often on bed rest with a hot water bottle
and as many pain killers as I could safely take.
I was a high achiever, with full busy days at school. The mentality
around periods was that they got you oﬀ swimming, but that was it—
carry on regardless, they shouldn’t have any impact on you. And so I
tried to do that for years.
The doctor prescribed me the strong painkiller Ponstan at ﬁrst,
which had little eﬀect. He told me that period pain would get better after
I had children, which was, we both agreed, a very long way oﬀ. He then
placed me on the contraceptive pill. I was 16 and proud to be on the
pill. Looking back now that makes me feel angry that there was no
other way of helping me to deal with this.
I felt sad, depressed, as though I was ﬂoating below the surface of
life. I didn’t feel like myself on the pill, but because I couldn’t point to
any deﬁnite symptoms, or explain what that really meant, no one would
take me seriously. No one told me it was because I was cut oﬀ from my
own rhythms. No one said that this is quite a normal feeling on the pill.
I took myself oﬀ it after a year or so, only to go back on it a year
later when I got a serious boyfriend (now husband). But once again I
was miserable on it, my libido plummeted—I always joked that the

[PDF page 56]

reason it was a good contraceptive was because I never wanted to
have sex when I was on it.
I tried a few diﬀerent types, each coming with great promises...and
longer lists of side eﬀects. I was longing for carefree contraception and
the added advantage of postponing my periods on beach holidays. But
in the end decided it just wasn’t for me. The cons far outweighed the
pros...in fact it felt like a bit of a con altogether. It was not the magic pill I
had been led to believe. I concluded that I must be the one weirdo that
it didn’t work for. Little did I know.
It wasn’t until I read The Pill: Are you sure it’s for you? by Jane
Bennett and Alexandra Pope, which shares the experiences of
hundreds of women from around the world, that I realised I was most
deﬁnitely not alone in experiencing these ‘minimal side eﬀects’ which
my doctors brushed aside as irrelevant or imaginary. In fact, fully one
third of users of the new generation of pill stop taking it because of
depression. This book and Sweetening the Pill by Holly Griggs Spall
added hard evidence to my own personal experience of the pill which
doctors had ignored, denied or belittled. This has been a consistent
and underreported issue since the advent of the pill in the late 1950s.
According to Jonathan Eig in his book The Birth of the Pill, almost half
of initial (co-opted) trial participants quit the ﬁrst pill trials due to
abdominal pain or nausea. In a second trial its creator, ‘chose to ignore
serious side eﬀects, which he deemed “psychosomatic”. It was one of
the boldest and most controversial ﬁeld trials in the history of modern
drugs.’
Some of the eﬀects are scary, especially those that are permanent.
Your levels of globulin, which binds testosterone and aﬀects the libido,
are four times lower, forever, if you have taken the pill. You have a
doubled risk of breast and ovarian cancer if you took it under the age of
twenty. Ditto brittle bones. All things I wished someone had told me

[PDF page 57]

then. These are invisible risks, that deliver serious, life-altering health
impacts later in life.
For a thorough round up of the scientiﬁc research and personal
experiences of women on the pill—from depression to weight gain, loss
of libido, infertility, thrombosis—I highly recommend these books, to
give you the insight that our doctors should, so that you can make
properly informed decisions before making such a major health
decision.
Looking back I mourn those lost years of unmedicated girlhood, of
my sexuality blossoming unhindered by chemical interference. I am
angry about the potential lifelong side eﬀects which went unmentioned.
I am sad that I trusted the doctors. And I am very glad that there is now
more information out there to help girls and women make properly
informed decisions.
Once we were married my husband and I learned the Natural
Fertility Awareness method (outlined below). It gave me a huge degree
more understanding and awareness of my body and its changes. I
remember leaving the clinic totally inspired and saying to my husband:
‘why don’t they teach that in schools? Every girl should know that about
her body.’ It set me oﬀ on my mission to inform girls and women about
their bodies and fertility.
And you?
Have you ever been on the pill or other hormonal contraceptives?
How was it for you?
Did you have side eﬀects? What were they? Were they
taken seriously?
Why did you go onto it? And what made you come oﬀ it?
How might you share your knowledge with other girls and women?
 

[PDF page 58]

Fertility awareness
by natural fertility expert Lorraine Ferrier
When we’re taught that it’s easy to get pregnant (mainly at school)
we unconsciously believe we don’t need to think about our fertility. This
is deﬁnitely not the case as in the UK one in seven couples are infertile
(one in eight in the US) and there is a 15–20% miscarriage rate. These
statistics are not meant to scare you, but to make you aware: there is a
powerful diﬀerence.
You don’t have to be a genius to do the maths and couple this (no
pun intended!) with the number of days you are fertile in your cycle to
realise the importance of looking after your fertility. Out of your
menstrual cycle of roughly 28 days (although let’s stress that every
woman’s is unique) the egg only survives for 18–24 hours and sperm
lasts ﬁve, sometimes seven days in fertile conditions.
Shifting our perception of our fertile lives from ‘preventing
pregnancy’ to ‘preserving fertility’ allows us to take charge of our
bodies and understand its ebbs and ﬂows way before we even think
about getting pregnant. It’s important for both our mental and menstrual
health.
Charting your fertility
There are many types of charting that you may have heard of such
as the Calendar Method, Billings, Creighton or Rhythm Method. I will be
sharing the Sympto-Thermal Method of Natural Family Planning, a
‘double check’ method which is scientiﬁcally proven and approved by
the World Health Organisation. The Sympto-Thermal Method uses the
fertility indicators of cervical ﬂuid and sensation along with a rise in the
basal body temperature to accurately predict fertile phases.
The Sympto-Thermal Method can also be used for pregnancy
prevention (contraception) and as such is a valuable life skill.

[PDF page 59]

In this chapter we give an overview of fertility awareness, but to
use the Sympto-Thermal Method for contraception reliably you need to
learn how to interpret your chart which we don’t detail here.
(You can download a Fertility Joy chart at
lorraineferrier.com/ resources)
There is a myriad of information online about fertility charting but
using a qualiﬁed professional is always advantageous especially if you
are using the method as a contraceptive. A specialised fertility
professional will be able to inform you how your unique lifestyle aﬀects
your fertility e.g. how some medications such as cough medicine,
natural or otherwise, impact ﬂuid secretions. They will also have a
network of trusted fertility experts to refer you to.
Your natural signs and symptoms of fertility
Cervical Fluid
The quality and quantity of cervical ﬂuid, sometimes called vaginal
discharge, (the colour, amount and texture) changes throughout your
menstrual cycle. At the beginning of your cycle it is thicker and may be
scant or white, ensuring that no sperm can enter the cervix (at the top
of your vagina). As your cycle continues the ﬂuid becomes more
amicable to sperm transport and survival (becoming thinner, copious
and may appear stretchy) indicating that ovulation is about to occur.
How To: Each time you go to the toilet, before passing urine, wipe
your vulva area and check your cervical ﬂuid on the toilet paper. This is
done throughout the day and a summary recorded on your fertility chart.
All ﬂuid is noted. Do not check mucus on your underwear as this will
give an inaccurate record.
In your own words describe the ‘CAT’: Colour, Amount and
Texture. One description in each category needs to be noted to enable
your chart to be interpreted correctly. Below are several examples from
each category:

[PDF page 60]

O Colour—clear/white/creamy
O Amount—lots/moderate/little/nothing
O Texture—slippery/stretchy/thick/pasty
It’s your chart so use words or a key that you are comfortable with and
can understand. Keep it simple.
Note: Fertile-type mucus is watery and stretchy to aid sperm
survival but ﬂuid that is not watery may also keep sperm alive. When
you begin to chart it’s advisable to have sex every other day as sperm
can sometimes get muddled with your cervical ﬂuid description.
Sensation
In addition to cervical ﬂuid the sensation at the entrance of the
vagina is used as another fertility indicator of this method—you are
more fertile at wet times in your cycle i.e. optimum swimming conditions
for sperm.
How To: Throughout the day note the feeling at the entrance to
your vagina (the vulva area). For example, when you are on your period
you will feel noticeably wetter than at other times. Or perhaps you
notice when you feel horny that you are wetter—when your libido rises
it’s due to hormonal ﬂuctuations increasing your fertile ﬂuid.
Summarise your observations at the end of the day: dry, damp,
moist, wet or nothing. When you are on your period just leave this
section blank.
Cervical Position
Changes in the cervix can also be charted as the position,
openness and texture of the cervix changes throughout your
menstrual cycle.
Changes in the position of your cervix throughout your cycle also
aid in identifying your fertile times. These changes can be felt at the top
of your vagina with your ﬁngers. The ﬁrst change usually occurs four to
ﬁve days before you ovulate. During the fertile phase your cervix can be

[PDF page 61]

higher in the vagina, softer to feel, more open and a little dimple felt at
the entrance to the cervix. This is a useful additional check when you
are ﬁnding it hard to describe your mucus pattern. Some couples ﬁnd
that they can feel the position of the cervix during sexual intercourse at
some times during their cycle—when the cervix is lower there may be
some discomfort.
How To: Check your cervix around the same time every day, but
not immediately upon rising in the morning or after a bowel motion.
If you have ever used tampons or a menstrual cup the method is
the same. Insert one or two ﬁngers into your vagina either from
standing, a slight squat or with one leg raised on a chair or toilet.
You need to observe the position, feel, opening and tilt of the
cervix.
O Position—is it low/raised/in between?
O Feel—is it ﬁrm (f) (like the tip of your nose)/soft (s) (like your lips)?
O Opening—is it opened or closed?
O Tilt— is it back, front or up? You may not be able to diﬀerentiate this, do not worry!
Note: The cervix takes months to close properly after vaginal birth and
remains slightly open. It’s therefore advisable to allow three months
before charting your cervix post-partum.
Basal Body Temperature
The basal body temperature (BBT) (temperature at rest) varies
during your cycle, rising when ovulation occurs, because of the release
of progesterone. It is this continual higher temperature without
menstruation that informs that conception has occurred.
How To: Take it ﬁrst thing in the morning (before any activity) while
still in bed—you can’t even roll over to kiss your partner! Take it at
approximately the same time every day. Put the thermometer into your
mouth as far back as possible under your tongue.

[PDF page 62]

Annotate your temperature on your chart, halfway on the horizontal
line (to one decimal point). Record the time that you take your
temperature within the ‘cervix’ column if not using, or by the ‘dot’ itself.
Once you have a few temperatures recorded join the dots so it’s easy
to interpret.
Note: If you are sick or consume alcohol annotate this on your
chart as it can aﬀect your readings.
Beneﬁts of fertility charting
If you do start fertility charting you may observe the
following beneﬁts:
O saving time, energy and stress if any fertility issue becomes apparent and you need to
be referred onto a specialist as you have a unique cycle record that can be summarised
by a qualiﬁed professional
O seeing in real time how alcohol or stress aﬀects your cycle motivating you to make any
necessary changes
O observing if and when you are ovulating (not all women ovulate on day 14 as some
medical professionals have you believe. And it is perfectly normal not to ovulate on each
cycle, although if this pattern is sustained do seek outside help)
O allowing you to see your fertile window in real time to pinpoint the best time for
conception to occur
O measuring the length of time it takes from ovulation to menstruation (the luteal phase)
this needs to be more than ten days in order to avoid miscarriage if you are pregnancy
planning
Many women enjoy learning to chart, especially relearning facts about
their reproductive system that they had long forgotten when taught at
school. Men particularly enjoy hearing about their partner’s cycle as it is
a discussion that does not (under normal circumstances) happen. And
charting brings an awareness and understanding to hormonal changes
and emotions due to PMS, bringing couples closer together.

[PDF page 63]

Lorraine Ferrier is the creator of the Fertility Joy Program—which
blends ancient wisdom and scientiﬁc know-how to make your baby
dreams a reality. If you want to conceive naturally or have had trouble
conceiving in the past check out Lorraine’s work.
www.lorraineferrier.com

[PDF page 64]

LIVING AND WORKING BY OUR CYCLES
With the encroachment of the female into the ‘male world’, the
advancement of women has been mostly intellectual, empty of the
intuitive understanding and creativity which is the basis of their nature.
There are no archetypes or traditions to guide women on their needs
and abilities in these new modern areas of work and experience. It is
therefore vitally important that women redress this lack, that they take
their awareness of their cyclic nature into the workplace and general
community, help society to see it as a positive and empowering force
on all levels—at work, in business, in the family, in relationships, in
education, in medicine, and in creating personal growth and goals—
and that they help to build guidelines, approaches and new traditions
for women to follow.
Miranda Gray, Red Moon
Miranda Gray observes in her book Red Moon that we live by solar
months consisting of man-made ‘working weeks’ divided by regular
periods of rest, ‘weekends’—whereas a woman’s natural pattern is
three weeks on and one week oﬀ. If you added together the weekend-
days in a lunar month you would have the ﬁve days needed to rest and
reset, rebalance and regroup during your moon time! It is, as they say,
still a man’s world.
But things are changing. Awareness of women’s cycles is
beginning to become more mainstream. Japan legally enshrined the
right for menstrual leave in 1947, and Taiwan in 2013 (although
admittedly Taiwan’s only legislates for an additional three days sick
leave a year). In Indonesia women are entitled to two days oﬀ a month
for menstruality, and in South Korea too. Stop and take that in for a
moment! Women get to work around their menstrual cycles. It is a real
thing, not just a utopian feminist dream. And it’s happening now in
some of the most technologically advanced cultures on the planet.

[PDF page 65]

Perhaps the greatest thing I have learnt from researching and
writing this book was how to plan my working life around my cycle. I am
admittedly self-employed, but with a hectic schedule of contract work,
creative work, interviews, teaching engagements and publishing
projects, I usually have enough work for three of me. I have to schedule
projects around my cycles to ensure that each bit of work gets the best
of me.
How does this work in reality? Well, launches and big events are
always planned during the mid-part of my cycles (days 5 to 17),
preferably at ovulation. And if there is a big event that I am not in control
of the timing of, which falls during my period, I ensure that I allow
myself extra time, do as much of the preparation beforehand, focus on
getting extra sleep the day before, and schedule in downtime
afterwards. I am also as compassionate as I can be with myself that I
will be more muddle-headed, clumsy, tired and forgetful than usual. But
I also know that I will be more intuitive and reﬂective, which when doing
interviews especially, is very powerful.
Because I work mainly with women who are aware of and attuned
to their cycles, our cycles are valued as a key part of our skill set and
work environment. Together we function in a positive-menstrual
environment—asking for extensions or timing changes to ﬁt our cycles,
or explaining to collaborators what part of our cycles we are in, so that
we can harness the particular energies of the time that we are in. The
phrase ‘I’ll bleed on it’ is common parlance, meaning ‘let me bring my
menstrual intuition and reﬂectiveness to this, and I’ll be back to you in a
few days with extra insight.’ As a business owner, menstrual awareness
and family-friendly working policies are two key ways that I live out my
values, and contribute positively to my employees and the world
beyond me, by working with, rather than against myself.

[PDF page 66]

Depending on your work and living situation, you will have greater
or lesser ﬂexibility to link your work and daily rhythm to your cycle. But
wherever we work, we need to practice standing our ground, prioritising
our health and well-being, and learning to advocate for ourselves.
If you view the year as a series of repeating cycles, it should be
possible to arrange the tasks so that each receives the most
appropriate attention and energy at each phase in your cycle.
Miranda Gray, Red Moon
You may well not be self-employed. But we all have some degree
of power over our days, how we use our energy and scheduling the
timing of tasks. We all have some way of ensuring we get time to rest
when we are ﬁnished work, rather than pushing ourselves to socialise
or achieve outside of work during those few days each month.
What is crucial for us all is seeing where our power to aﬀect things
lies. Even in the smallest of ways. And then owning that. Learning to
voice our needs, or to actively set the rhythm we need can be hugely
challenging to many women. I completely understand. You are eﬀecting
a one-woman revolution. But know that you, and all around you, will
reap the rewards, as you become more productive, creative and
healthy. The ﬁrst, smallest changes, when we feel powerless, are the
hardest. But then, once we start recognising the impact of these small
changes, we ﬁnd ways to make larger and larger ones. And in time, as
we live these changes, and others see their positive eﬀect, these things
ripple out from us.
Going against natural bodily rhythms can create stress...Imagine a
doctor telling you to ignore your circadian [daily] rhythm. Ignore the
natural inclination to sleep at night, just keep going till you drop. Not
only would it be diﬃcult to order society, it would be madness for your
wellbeing. But in essence that’s what’s happening to women when
we’re told to ignore the rhythm of the menstrual cycle.

[PDF page 67]

Alexandra Pope
Working by the menstrual cycle
Menstruation
During menstruation we tend to be internally focused and our
energy is subdued. This is a time to step back as much as possible.
Work by yourself where you can. If you have simple repetitive tasks
which need doing, now is the time for sedentary activities, ones which
do not require too much of your concentration. Do not put yourself
under pressure to make big decisions at this time. If you can take a
long lunch, or ﬁnish early, or take a half day to work on admin from
home, then do.
If you can cut back your hours and make them up later in the
month, do. Perhaps you can work from home or hire someone to help,
or delegate high-energy or decision making tasks, or put them oﬀ until
later in the week? Cut back as much as you can for three to ﬁve days
(ideally two days pre-menstrually and for the ﬁrst three days of your
period). And do not take on new projects at this time if you can help it.
This is the time where the right and left hemispheres of your brain
are more connected as the membrane between them thins. You will ﬁnd
you have more access to intuitive thought, and will ﬁnd it comes
naturally to reﬂect on the preceding month, vision the coming month,
and ﬁnd solutions to problems that have been evading you. Use this
time to rest, reﬂect, vision and evaluate.
Be sure to keep your blood sugar levels topped up with regular
meals of nourishing food. Stay warm. If you can take a day or two at the
start of your menstruation to retreat then do. Later in this book I will
share tools for creating your own retreat space. Perhaps you can only
manage an hour each evening to yourself—then make that a priority—
put it in your diary just as you would with any other
important appointment.

[PDF page 68]

Pre-ovulation
Your hormones are starting to increase and you feel open to new
things. You will most probably be feeling calm, open, dynamic, clear,
energetic and enthusiastic. You will have the capacity for high levels of
mental and physical activity. Start by catching up with things that may
have slipped during menstruation. This is the time to start projects and
new collaborations: organise and prioritise your time and energy to get
the best results. Brainstorm for the month ahead, write your to-do lists
and tick oﬀ all that you achieve.
This is a great time for a clear out as you have lots of energy and
little emotional attachment to things—now is the time for spring
cleaning. Any fresh starts you need to make in your life: instigating
healthy eating or exercise regimes, or searching for a partner, do
it now!
Ovulation
Hormones increase your verbal skills, optimising your abilities to
communicate and collaborate. You have lots of energy, so conﬁdence
and self-esteem should also be high. Now’s the time for big events and
launches. Give birth to creative projects that you have been gestating.
This is the time to work late as your creative juices and inspiration
are ﬂowing—doubly so if it’s also full moon. But be careful not to burn
out by trying to be superwoman—you will pay for it later in the cycle!
You may feel attuned to other women, especially mothers, and
generally receptive to others’ input. So seek feedback, schedule
important meetings. Now is a great time for team work and
collaboration. Now is also the time when you can get pregnant—so be
careful, or go for it, depending on your intentions!
Take advantage of your nurturing energy to visit family and friends
who you ﬁnd demanding. Indulge your mothering side with your own
children if you have them.

[PDF page 69]

Turn your attention to making your home feel welcoming and full of
love. Have friends over or entertain work colleagues. Over the next
week or so, ﬁll your freezer and larder with food that you have made to
see you through the hungry gap of your late cycle when you will
probably not feel like cooking. This nourishing food will make all the
diﬀerence and will stop you snacking on junk which makes PMS
symptoms worse.
Pre-menstrual
Start to cut back on work which requires collaboration or high
levels of energy. Do not plan athletic or endurance events for this time.
Try to avoid long, tiring journeys, especially across time zones.
This is the time for dealing with frustrations and irritations—but
only if you can allow yourself to interact with a modicum of reason as
well as powerful emotion! Do not be too hasty, pick ﬁghts or burn your
bridges at a whim at this time—it is easily done! Instead take notes on
your feelings, tell a friend or partner, allow them to be a sounding board
before you take decisive action.
Focus on administration, more sedentary activities, project work
which does not require too much concentration or ﬁne motor skills.
Allow yourself more sleep and early nights. Avoid evening meetings or
late night parties as your moon time approaches and avoid encounters
which are liable to make you overly emotional. Now is the time to try
more personal creative projects which require intuitive guidance
and reﬂection.
Cycles within cycles
It is important to note that within our monthly (moon inﬂuenced)
and daily (sun inﬂuenced) cycles we also have ‘ultradians’, meaning
cycles which recur regularly many times throughout the day. Dr Ernest
Rossi discovered that we have periods of 1½ hours of alertness and
focus followed by 20 minutes of required rest or downtime, to ensure

[PDF page 70]

optimum functioning. It is vitally important to honour this rhythm
throughout your menstrual cycle—on days of both high and low energy.
And whilst you may not be able to have a complete break, ensure that
you take a couple of minutes to stretch, walk, yawn, go outside, go to
the toilet, close your eyes, have a drink or snack at these regular
intervals throughout the day—just listen to your body’s signals, it will tell
you what you need.

[PDF page 71]

HONOURING OUR MOON TIME
Any cycling woman knows the deep yearning for quietude during
her ﬂow time. Every ounce of our body and soul calls for rest, while our
culture calls us to keep going, no matter what.
DeAnna L’am, menstrual educator
In their book, The Pill: Are you sure it’s for you? Jane Bennett and
Alexandra Pope refer to ‘menstruation as meditation’ pointing out that it
is our own personal Sabbath. Our culture does not honour the Sabbath,
a real day of rest, as our ancestors did. Nor do we have dispensation to
‘take it easy’ during our moon time from the outside world, as the
Native Americans and ancient Canaanite women did. And so learning
to take time for ourselves and rest is a revolutionary act.
Often when we rest all sorts of uncomfortable feelings can come
up (and comments get made). We might feel:
O lazy
O like we ought to be doing something
O that we’re wasting time
O guilty
O bored
In my own experience creating space for moon time rest and retreat is
vital for my mental health. If I do not, and try to carry on as normal, I get
exhausted, physically and mentally. I get resentful and angry. If I am on
my feet for most of the day, or doing exercise on the ﬁrst two days of my
cycle I get crampy too, and my ﬂow seems even heavier. I feel literally
dragged down. I have found that if I honour my moon time these
symptoms alleviate.
Your moon time is the time when you are feeling tiredest, slowest,
when your energy is reﬂective, when your body needs rest, and your
mind needs quiet. Creating a retreat space for yourself allows you to
honour your body’s natural energy cycle.

[PDF page 72]

We all need to create time and space for:
O retreat
O self-care
O rest
O reﬂection
Perhaps today allow yourself to sit in stillness for ﬁve minutes. Or to go
to bed half an hour earlier than usual and drift. Or to write in your
journal for ﬁve minutes. Just choose one of those things. Then
tomorrow, or next month, you can build up to two of them, and so on,
until learning to make time for rest comes more naturally to you.
And you?
How do you create mindfulness in your day? Perhaps yoga, tai chi,
meditation, a walk, prayer, some journaling time...
How might you simplify your life during your moon time?
What little acts feel comforting to you?
OOO
In a later chapter I will be sharing how to create a sacred space to
share with other women to celebrate your moon time. But before we co-
create with (and for) others, we need this practice to be rooted for and
in ourselves. We need to learn how to hold space for ourselves, and
settle into ourselves. The rest of this chapter will take you through how
to create a safe sanctuary, a private moon lodge or red tent just for you.
Often when we think of retreats, we think of disappearing to a
beautiful hut high in the hills, or to a silent religious order—or an
expensive spa. But learning how to retreat within the conﬁnes of our
own lives is a vital lesson for us to learn as women.
The most important part of retreat is creating a space apart from
everyone, where you will be uninterrupted. Many women refer to it as
‘retreating to their cave’—think seclusion, dark, quiet, containment
and safety.

[PDF page 73]

In practical terms this means picking both the right time of day,
and a place that you can shut a door behind you. I usually use our
bedroom, when the younger children were sleeping during the day, and
again in the evening as soon as they have gone to bed. (I must point
out at this juncture that I have had a baby co-sleeping in my bed for the
past six years, so if I retreat in the evening time, it is done with baby in
there!)
Or perhaps you can tempt your partner to head out with friends to
the bar or cinema so you can use your main living area.
Whichever space you use, be sure to make it feel safe. Ensure that
you will not be burst in upon or have demands made upon you or
judgements made.
Do what you can,
with what you have,
where you are!
Shut the door, draw the curtains, take the phone oﬀ the hook, turn
oﬀ your computer and commit to not answering the door.
Make your space feel womb-like, safe and contained.
Cover up anything which is messy or distracting with a sheet or
beautiful throw: the TV, kids’ toys, paperwork, general mess...
I suggest gentle lighting, like that which you might see in any
sacred space such as a church or birthing room. Either a single lamp,
or candles. This lowering of light levels has a direct impact on brain
function and hormone levels. This helps you to shift into a more relaxed,
peaceful and intuitive frame of mind and to feel like you have had a
real rest.
Perhaps you might like to burn incense or essential oils, or
massage your hands and feet with a sweet smelling cream. Scent is a
powerful way to set a sacred space.

[PDF page 74]

Your set up can be as simple or ceremonially intricate as your
heart desires.
Make a hot water bottle, hot pad, castor oil pack or just wrap
yourself in a snuggly blanket to keep you cosy and soothe your aches.
Get yourself a big glass of water or herbal tea. Hold it in your
hands and drink mindfully from it. This will help to get you back into
your body, and to replace the ﬂuids that you are losing through
your menstruation.
Consciously breathe to centre yourself. Allow yourself to settle
back into your body, and the whirl of the day to slow to a stop. Allow the
two spheres—your inner and outer selves—to come into alignment,
otherwise you will be coming from a place of mental chatter, or
emotional turmoil. Sit for as long as it takes to allow this to settle.
If it helps you, do a guided meditation (perhaps the happy womb
visualisation on the Free Resources section of thehappywomb.com).
For mothers or busy working women, these acts alone, especially
the conscious delineation of your own physical space, which you so
rarely have, is a powerful tool in taking back your own energy and
power. It teaches you, and those you share your life with, about your
desire to set limits on others’ demands on you during your moon time.
Setting out your space is a conscious way of signalling that you need to
be alone and that it is sacred and to be respected.
However if you want more to ‘do’ then I have a wonderful
smörgåsbord of activities for you—but, as always, don’t try to do
them all!
Activities
Journaling
Try journaling whatever comes up in your head: don’t plan,
rationalise or be too clever. Perhaps write in free verse. I ﬁnd quite often
that the ‘voice’ which emerges during my moon time is a poetic voice

[PDF page 75]

rather than rational linear thought. It speaks directly to me and I sit and
transcribe its rich images.
Moon letters
A dear friend and I wrote moon letters over the course of a year.
Every moon time we would sit and write a handwritten letter—we
shared our dreams, visions for the month ahead, reﬂections, quotes
from books, poems we had written. These were our way into
reconnecting with our own cycles, sharing our wisdom and insight,
learning to take time out from the demands of being mothers to young
children. It deepened our friendship at a time when we both struggled to
ﬁnd the time, space and energy to talk on the phone.
Dream journaling
Our moon time is often a time of powerful archetypal dreams which
can stay with us through the day. By keeping a journal we tap into this
wisdom, we ﬁnd messages from a deeper level of consciousness, and
begin to be able to interpret the symbols and themes of our own
personal dream language. In learning to honour our dreams, we also
honour our need to sleep rather than perceive of it as lazy or a waste
of time.
Self-care regime
Now is a great time to enjoy nourishing self-care practices—
perhaps a face mask or manicure. Take time to brush your hair or
moisturise your skin—nurture and care for your physical body.
Meditation/trance/prayer
Meditation needn’t be a formal practice. Simply slowing the mind,
whilst watching a candle ﬂame, or spiralling steam coming from a cup
of tea, gazing at the moon out of the window, listening to the wind
whistling or our own heart beats—all of these bring us into a receptive
meditative state where we just are, and our mind can let go of control.
Meditation is described as listening to the divine whereas prayer is

[PDF page 76]

active, talking to the divine. The divine might be your god or goddess,
the universe or your highest sense of self.
Creative doodling/imaginative painting/collage
Any creative activities that can be done in a dreamlike state, which
do not require deep concentration or planning, but are rather an
exploration of colour, materials and mood, are what is called for at
moon time. I love zentangles, which are a meditative form of doodling.
Focus on creative work which is expressive and non-productive—
this is especially important if you are a working artist—this is not a time
to ﬁnish your latest commission, but rather a time to mine your
unconscious for images.
I have recently discovered SoulCollage by Seena B. Frost, which
is a wonderful visual technique for creating your own archetype cards
which would be a great moon time project.
Intuitive practices
Tap into your heightened intuitive powers at this time with
whatever intuitive practice you feel comfortable with: cards, runes,
dowsing...
Reading
Now is the time to immerse yourself in a book which feeds your
soul—perhaps something spiritual or meaningful to you as a woman. In
your menstrual phase you are especially sensitive, so stay away from
horror or thrillers which can overload you emotionally.
Whatever you choose to do, take this opportunity to ﬁll yourself full
to the brim with love, inspiration, gentleness and beauty.
Daily self-care rituals for moon time
If you do not feel called to create a retreat for yourself, the bare
minimum you should do at your moon time is some extra special self-
care—this might include:
O dark coloured underwear

[PDF page 77]

O pyjamas and clothes that you won’t worry about getting stained
O red towels or dark coloured sheets
O a heat pad or hot water bottle
O a manicure/pedicure/facial/massage/hot stone treatment
O menstrual products that really work for you—perhaps beautiful cloth ones, a moon cup
or thick night pads
O taking time to eat really well
In the next couple of chapters we will explore how to alleviate and heal
some of the more uncomfortable and unpleasant aspects of our cycles.

[PDF page 78]

PMS BUSTERS
Our menstrual cycle is our barometer of our being.
Jane Hardwicke Collings, shamanic midwife
PMS (pre-menstrual syndrome) or PMT (pre-menstrual tension)
can include any (or all) of the following symptoms:
O abdominal bloating and water retention
O tearfulness
O being snappy, angry, short-tempered, impatient
O cramping
O lower back ache
O dizziness, nausea, fainting
O diarrhoea or constipation
O migraine or headaches
O forgetfulness, brain fog or diﬃculty making decisions
O spots, greasy skin and hair
O tender, lumpy, larger breasts
For some women these symptoms may start over a week before their
period comes and may continue throughout their bleeding time. This is
no small matter if two weeks out of every month are ﬁlled with physical
and emotional suﬀering. If you are highly sensitive or empathic be
aware that the pre-menstrual phase makes you more susceptible to
overwhelm.
If you have had a particularly stressful month, have been ill or
taking medication, do not be surprised if your menstrual symptoms are
much more severe than normal. This is your body using this natural
puriﬁcation part of the cycle to clear itself of the stresses and toxins of
the previous month.
In this chapter I share a number of useful natural solutions for
PMS. It can take trial and error to ﬁnd the combination which works
best for you. Don’t try them all at once!

[PDF page 79]

If you need something more specially tailored for you, then seek
out someone who takes you seriously, is well-qualiﬁed, experienced
and in whom you trust. Many women ﬁnd that conventional doctors can
be very dismissive of PMS symptoms—having the attitude: ‘it’s just
part of being female, so stop complaining!’ And many may seek to cure
you of your problems by prescribing the pill. I remember that my doctor
when I was a teen told me I’d have to learn to live with it and it would
get better after I had children—what a great help that was!
If you are tempted to take the pill to alleviate PMS symptoms, or
your young daughter has this suggested to her, be sure to read the
book The Pill: Are you sure it’s for you? before doing so, to ensure that
you are fully informed about it.
What causes PMS?
Somewhat incredibly, many menstrual researchers have
discovered that PMS is a condition almost exclusively found in the
Western world. Indeed, it is a complaint that women and medical
professionals alike in other cultures have no comprehension of.
Relationships, upbringing, the stress and pressure of living in a
masculine, modern world—all these things regularly disconnect us from
awareness of our authentic female nature.
Miranda Gray
PMS has been attributed to a combination of: pollution, poor diets,
raised stress levels, 24/7 lifestyles and the status of women in our
culture. Other researchers put it down to mineral deﬁciencies—most
notably in magnesium and calcium. But again the lack of these, or poor
absorption of them can be put down to poor diets, toxins and stress.
In the afterword to The Wise Wound, authors Penelope Shuttle
and Peter Redgrove state: ‘Society apparently has ampliﬁed the
menstrual taboo by creating a diet [and lifestyle] that is OK for men but
which harms women’s menstrual cycles.’

[PDF page 80]

It seems that we have built a culture which optimises PMS,
depression and exhaustion, rather than women’s health. It is time to
start taking this back, one woman’s life at a time.
Scientists have described how our physical growth happens at
night. New mothers and babies require much higher levels of sleep and
rest. And so do menstruating women. For thousands of years farmers
have known about the importance of allowing ﬁelds to lie fallow to re-
balance their nutrients and growing potential.
It is just the same with us women. As life givers we are given the
clues in the form of PMS that in order to be healthy, bring forth new life
and create new work and nurture others, it is essential that we rest and
regenerate.
We live in a culture which demands that we are ‘turned on’ all the
time. Always bright and happy. Always available for intercourse—both
sexual and otherwise with people. Psychologist Peter Suedfeld
observes that we are all ‘chronically stimulated, socially and physically,
and are probably operating at a stimulation level higher than that for
which our species evolved.’
It is up to us to value rest and fallow time. We must demand it for
ourselves to ensure our health.
The Crazy Woman
The emotional side of PMS is the raw, primal female voice
unleashed, your primal power saying ‘Enough—I need space, time,
freedom and expression—let me out!’
This is the Crazy Woman, another feminine archetype. She was
depicted and revered in ancient goddesses: Kali, Medea and Hecate,
the face of the goddess of death. But our modern cultures have no
place for her and no image of her. The dark goddess is missing from
the Western world. We fear her destructiveness inside ourselves and
she is deeply threatening to our society.

[PDF page 81]

We dare not admit to her for fear of being deemed ‘unable to
cope’, out of concern that our children might be taken from us or that
we might be hospitalized in a mental institution. And so our Crazy
Woman side is further denied, pushed away, or medicated with anti-
depressants, self-harm, eating disorders or alcohol. Especially when
she emerges pre-menstrually.
Crazy Woman does not really wish to kill you. She wishes to maim
your talents and paralyse your ability; she wishes to strip you of all your
sacredness. She pulls your sanity and tests you, trying to pull you away
from your centre.
Lynn V Andrews, Meta Arts magazine
The Crazy Woman emerges for me after too much unbroken child-
caring time, sleep deprivation or too little creative head space. I get
cranky and snappy. If this is compounded over weeks and weeks I
suﬀer from PMS, migraines and depression. The results aren’t pretty. I
want to see blood, make pain. I want to do damage, destroy everything
which on a diﬀerent day I hold dear. I want to smash plates, slam doors,
hurt my children, scream at the top of my lungs, even kill myself. But I
don’t. So I shout, or drive the car a bit too fast, or stuﬀ my face with
unhealthy food. I want to run, to hide, to quit once and for all. I have had
enough.
Denial of our creative selves, lack of space and time to be or
reﬂect are lures for the Crazy Woman. She emerges, raging, crying,
shouting, threatening, hands shaking, face pale. But rather than let her
out, we try to shut her up and then blame everyone else for her
enslavement and our feeling of being trapped.
When you are tired and drained and you have given every drop of
energy, love, patience. When you need a break, some head space,
some body space and just can’t get it. Then you feel truly like you are
going crazy, like you are dying inside.

[PDF page 82]

And this is right in a way—we are experiencing the psychic
suﬀocation of our creative selves, when we are so subsumed by
external demands, when we do not have time to tend our creative ﬁres,
to unleash our imaginative power, plumb our depths, to breathe
consciously, to reﬂect, to play.
Honouring your Crazy Woman
How can we ﬁnd safe expression for the Crazy Woman? How can
we be true to her and ourselves? How can we ﬁnd balance in our lives
so that she need not emerge too often or destructively?
As crazy as it might sound, rather than push her away, we need to
honour her.
So next time your Crazy Woman comes to visit, don’t run and hide
from her. Welcome her as an honoured guest.
Copy down her words in your journal and heed them well. Stop
what you are doing and drink tea with her. Dance to her wild tune, play
your drums with her and shake your rattles. Take her to bed and ravish
her with sleep, let her guide you into other realms of your
consciousness. Trust her rather than refuse her. Let her lead you by the
hand and thank her for her presence.
She is you—your shadow side with lessons to teach you about
what you choose to hide away. She calls your deepest soul attention to
that which you refuse to shine your light on. She may terrify you,
embarrass you, mess up your carefully made plans and your carefully
done mascara, but she is your soul sister, your twin self. She has been
scorned and rejected, demonised throughout history. Open your arms
and your heart to her and her lessons. Welcome your soul sister back.
And you?
What have you learnt about the Crazy Woman—from your mother,
grandmother, aunts, teachers, female friends? Was she acceptable or
locked away, the mad woman in the attic? Was she papered over with

[PDF page 83]

niceness and face powder? Was she medicated with anti-depressants
or alcohol? Did she emerge in screaming ﬁts or suicide attempts?
Grab a sheet of paper and put down all the words you associate
with her.
Take your journal and write down her last few visits—why did she
come? What invited her into your life? How did she express herself?
What did she want? What was her message?
Do the creative archetype exercise from earlier, this time focused
on The Crazy Woman.
And now that you have a tangible sense of her, how could you
represent her or symbolise her? If you have an altar space in your
house, put an image or reminder on it of her.
OOO
Partners and the menstrual cycle
Part of learning to live in harmony with our menstrual cycles is in
educating the people we share our lives with—especially our partners.
Women partnered to women have a natural advantage, as your
partner will already have some understanding of the rollercoaster of
emotions involved in being a cycling woman.
Women partnered to men need to ﬁnd a way, when they are feeling
loving and communicative, to help share both the biological and
spiritual insights of the menstrual cycle (this book might be of interest, I
know a few men have read it!) The very basic understanding we need
to share is how our energy levels change throughout the cycle. You
need to explain that menstrual women need more rest, and then work
together to ﬁnd ways you can have the rest and support you need
approaching menstruation and for the ﬁrst couple of days of your moon
time. This is even more important if you also work together. I know a
number of couples who plan their business schedules around the
female partner’s menstrual cycle.

[PDF page 84]

Explaining the ﬂuctuations in your fertility and libido are also key,
so that he can take an active part in your contraceptive decisions, and
your sex life can be a real, loving reﬂection of both of your sex drives.
Many couples are unaware of the peaks of libido at both ovulation and
menstruation, and this knowledge is a wonderful counter-weight to the
‘negatives’ of pre-menstrual issues.
Sharing openly with your partner about your menstrual cycle and
fertility and working together to ﬁnd ways to honour and support them in
your lives is one of the best ways to bring real intimacy, trust,
understanding and harmony to your relationship.
OOO
Blood and milk—menstruation and motherhood
What strikes me reading through a lot of the material on
menstruation is that is seems oddly detached from the fruits of the
menstrual cycle: children. In The Wise Wound, Penelope Shuttle notes
that there is no research done on the impact of a mother’s PMS on her
children. Yet think what a massive impact this has on them. This is yet
another area where we need to learn to break the silence and ﬁnd new
ways of living and mutual support.
I saw my mother struggle badly with PMS. She seemed to have it
for two out of every four weeks. She was like a bear, and any tiny thing
was an excuse for her to shout and scream and behave (in my eyes)
unforgivably. It seemed to me to be a ‘get out of jail free card’ for her
moods and emotions: ‘It’s not my fault, I’ve got PMS’.
So we all suﬀered along with her. She was disempowered by her
emotions. And we were disempowered by them too. It felt like the whole
house was cowering from her and her bloody (excuse the pun) period!
And so when my time came, and for years afterwards, I tried to
hide mine underground, because I didn’t want to be like her. I didn’t

[PDF page 85]

want to make it everyone else’s problem. But that is easier said than
done. Especially, as I was to discover, when you have young children.
Perhaps children are not part of your plan now, or ever. But most
women at some point in their moon life will have to balance the constant
energetic requirements of children with their own changing
energy cycles.
For me this has been an enormous learning curve, because at just
the time when I am really starting to tune into my own rhythms, I have
three children making demands of me—needing me to wake in the
night to breastfeed or settle them, wanting me to play high energy
games when all I want to do is lie on the sofa. I ﬁnd it deeply
challenging being able to feel my body’s rhythm and know how best I
can meet this, and yet be constantly prevented from doing this because
of the needs of my children and their lack of understanding.
Chinese medicine describes how bleeding and lactating both
deplete the body, and do not recommend doing both. If you are, then it
is vital that you support your system with optimum nutrition, extra rest
and perhaps herbs.
In other cultures and other times women would not be left to care
for children alone, in isolation. Instead it was the job of the community
to care for, feed and educate the young of the tribe, and women would
share their mothering and household chores between them.
Bear this in mind during your moon time. Join together with friends,
let your children play together as you cook a meal to share. Or
exchange childcare so that you can both have a couple of hours
to yourself.
OOO
Positively menstrual!
So how can we transform PMS? I have found that this simple four
part process works wonders in my own life, especially in combatting

[PDF page 86]

martyr mentality:
Step one: Feel/identify your needs
Step two: Claim your needs
Step three: Make it your problem, not everyone else’s
Step four: Make your peace—express gratitude and
seek forgiveness.
As soon as you model how you can positively meet your needs,
you will ﬁnd those around you following your lead and helping to
support this. Whereas if you are attacking them and they are having to
be defensive, they are not going to feel very supportive or like giving
you anything!
Learn to use your power wisely. Own it!
And you?
What is it that you would really like to say? And to whom?
Create a safe space and allow yourself to speak your truth—
without needing to justify or explain, simply hear your voice speaking
your full truth. Every last bit of it. Ungag yourself. Free your voice. Give
yourself permission to let your feelings be as they are. Speak your truth
—and take ownership of it.
O You can do this by journaling, putting your seething, unexpressed, and seemingly
inexpressible, taboo feelings into words is a massive step in healing, letting go and
ﬁnding clarity for yourself.
O Even more powerful is speaking out loud. So if nothing else, read aloud what you have
written in the privacy of your own room.
O But more powerful still is to be heard by someone else (usually not the person it is
directed at, at this point. The purpose of this is to purge your powerful feelings
uncensored.) Ensure absolute conﬁdentiality—perhaps a counsellor or therapist, your
women’s group, red tent, a close friend or partner.
After this venting and release, after reﬂection and possible feedback,
then you can clarify what, and if, you do want to communicate to the

[PDF page 87]

person involved, or what action you need to take. Then you can act with
conviction and speak in a way that your message can be heard. At
other times, simply allowing yourself to hear and express your truth is
all that is needed to ﬁnd peace and healing and to move forward.
Instant PMS busters
Chances are that if you have PMS right now you feel crappy and
don’t know where to start. You just want to feel better. Pick three of
these and you’ll be well on your way to feeling good. Can’t choose?
Just close your eyes, point to one. Then do it!
O In my grandmother’s words: SIMPLIFY, SIMPLIFY, SIMPLIFY! This is your mantra for
a better moon time.
O Try to turn oﬀ screens at least an hour before you go to bed and get to sleep in
good time.
O Relish your dream time. Ernest Hartmann, in The Biology of Dreaming, describes how
our need for REM sleep increases in the pre-menstrual period and lack of it causes PMS.
O Ensure you have no major deadlines, launches or big stressful events—either get work
done early or renegotiate extra time for yourself so that days 25 to 2 are as clear of
pressure as they can be.
O Cook in advance for yourself and freeze the meals, go out to eat, get invited to others’
houses, have your partner take over cooking duties, buy ready meals...
O Limit energetic or extended physical activity—no long hikes or marathons!
O A short, gentle stroll outside does you the world of good to reconnect with yourself and
nature and get the energy moving.
O Or perhaps a walking meditation.
O Have you discovered womb yoga? It is a wonderful, gentle form developed especially
for women.
O Keep your clothing comfortable—especially if you get bloated or chilly at this time.
Wrap up warm!
O Do something to make yourself look and feel beautiful—wear a special necklace, a
lovely scent, a pretty scarf...

[PDF page 88]

O Make no major decisions. Just don’t do it to yourself!
O Take time every day for yourself.
O Create your own personal moon lodge—minimum half an hour devoted retreat and
self-care.
O Get as much support as you can for any big projects, especially events outside of your
control—work, Christmas, relatives visiting...
O Be open with those that you are close to that this is a time where you need to be gentle
with yourself.
O Do everything you can to make yourself feel cherished, NOT a patient or a victim—
your mental attitude matters hugely.
O Scream into a pillow.
O Take ten conscious breaths.
O Have a girly lunch with a friend.
O Let your hair down, your tears out and your feelings be heard.
O Write in your journal. Use this time to vision.
O Get a punch bag and beat it!
O Have an orgasm—they’re great for releasing tensions in the yoni, and they give you a
rush of serotonin and oxytocin to boost your mood.
O Choose one relationship issue to take action on. Do not try to change your world or
those around you just because you are angry and frustrated. Just one clear
communication, made in calmness, of a need that you have and how you would like it to
be met. Next month you get a chance to voice another.
O Bathe yourself in the positivity of others if you are feeling dark—uplifting books, ﬁlms,
blogs...
O Listen to something that soothes you—music, an inspirational speaker, birdsong...
O Tend your personal altar or sacred space—add something red, an image of the Crazy
Woman or the dark goddess perhaps.
O Do some receiving from your family: get a full body massage, a shoulder rub, a hug, a
meal made for you...
O Snuggle up with a hot water bottle or castor oil pack.

[PDF page 89]

O Brew up a pot of herbal tea.
O Go to the health food store and get some supplements for yourself. And then
take them!
O Eat chocolate!
O Recharge yourself with a pedicure, acupuncture, cranio-sacral therapy, reiki,
chiropractic treatment...
O Start a dream journal—note down everything that comes through from your other
layers of consciousness at this time.
O Get an abdominal massage—Arvigo Technique of Mayan Abdominal Massage is
created for women’s womb health.
O Try a womb wrap.
O Cut out wheat, sugar and animal products.
There is no shame in tears.
There is a need for anger.
Blood will ﬂow.
Speak your truth.
Follow your intuition.
Nurture your body.
But above all...
Let yourself rest.

[PDF page 90]

HEALING OUR BODIES
Healing is a journey. It is a path we walk every day, not just in a
moment of crisis.
Paula Youmell
We can do all the emotional healing in the world, but if we are not
nurturing and nourishing our physical bodies we will never ﬁnd good
health. What we eat can impact our moods, create allergic responses
and aﬀect our energy levels. Part of our healing journey is becoming
aware of how we respond to diﬀerent foods at diﬀerent times in our
cycle.
Herbs are part of the traditional wise woman approach to health.
Cultures around the world use the healing powers of plants to help
support the female system from Chinese herbs (often given alongside
acupuncture), to Ayurveda (alongside yoga), Native American and
traditional European wise woman herbalism. They have been used to
promote fertility, abort unwanted foetuses, support breastfeeding, tone
the uterus in preparation for birth and to lighten or induce bleeding.
Herbs tend to be much gentler than pharmaceuticals and work
with the body, rather than simply repressing symptoms. They tend to
have few, if any, unwanted side eﬀects. However, they are still powerful
external forces in the body and we need to have respect for herbs, in
just the same way as we do for pharmaceutical medicines.
Herbs can be taken in capsules, teas or tinctures. They can be
grown yourself, sourced from a health shop or herbalist.
If you are new to herbs I strongly recommend consulting with a
herbalist or naturopath to help to focus and support your healing. If you
have used herbs before, then be sure to consult a good herbal book or
knowledgeable health food shop assistant to check of any
contraindications for other medication you may be taking, breastfeeding
implications and existing health complaints.

[PDF page 91]

Below is a resource of herbal and nutritional remedies for easing
moon time symptoms, and helping you to work with your cycles.
Please note I am not a trained herbalist. The list of herbs below is
simply provided as information, not a prescription. Whilst I have
sourced these suggestions from a range of reliable sources and I have
tried many of them myself, I request that you seek further advice before
taking them.
Herbs
The simplest way to take herbs is either as a herbal tincture in
water or brewing herbs (fresh or dried) together to make tea.
Teas
These can be bought loose or in tea bags or harvested from
your garden:
O Lemon Balm (Melissa)—to soothe and relax.
O Red Raspberry Leaf—tones the uterus and aids nausea.
O Nettle—for iron. Tones the uterus, supports production of breast-milk and vitamin K.
O Cramp Bark—for easing cramps!
O Motherwort—good for cramping during menstruation and easing labour contractions
and after-pains.
O Chamomile—to soothe, relax and help sleep.
O Shepherd’s Purse—to ease excessively heavy bleeding.
My personal favourites...
O Rose-hip and hibiscus—a vibrant red tea perfect for bleeding time ceremonies, and a
good source of vitamin C.
O Cinnamon, ginger and cardamom for warming and soothing.
O Lemon verbena and lemon balm to refresh and relax.
In Thirteen Moons, a herbalist suggests:

[PDF page 92]

O a combination of red raspberry, cramp bark, squaw vine and black cohosh for general
PMS symptoms.
Neal’s Yard recommends:
O Motherwort, passiﬂora and skullcap for easing stress.
O Agnus castus and false unicorn for stabilising the hormones.
O Motherwort, chamomile, cramp bark, passiﬂora and raspberry to ease period pains.
O Dandelion and parsley leaves for relieving bloating.
Supplements
Another simple way to take your herbs is in supplement form
alongside a multivitamin in the morning.
O Shatavari—the Queen of Herbs for women. Its name means ‘she who has a hundred
husbands’ in Sanskrit. It is used in Ayurveda to enhance the libido, energise, lighten
menstrual bleeding and generally support the female hormonal system.
O St John’s Wort—for low mood and anxiety symptoms. Because of regulations this is
becoming increasingly diﬃcult to source in the EU. (Note it is not recommended for
people who are bi-polar.)
O Feverfew—for migraine and headaches (can be eaten fresh in salads and
sandwiches).
O Evening primrose—great for relieving PMS symptoms, taken ten days before bleeding
starts—especially eﬀective for easing tender breasts.
O Maca—a Peruvian root, great for energy boosting, many add it to green smoothies
along with spirulina for an instant nutritional hit.
O Quiet Life—a natural supplement combining passiﬂora, lettuce, hops and valerian to
calm anxiety and help natural sleep.
Flower essences
O Female Essence—a ready-made blend of ﬂower essences to support the
female system.

[PDF page 93]

O Flower remedies (such as Bach): especially Impatiens (for impatient feelings), Holly
(for when you’re feeling prickly) and Oak (for strength).
Essential oils
Can be used for burning, massage or in a bath—should always be
used diluted in a base oil (e.g. sweet almond oil) if applied direct to the
skin:
O Clary Sage—brings clarity to the mind.
O Rose—good for anger.
O Geranium—good for depression and stress.
O Neroli—good for soothing, weepiness and depression.
O Mandarin/Orange—uplifting.
O Juniper—diuretic for bloating and swelling.
O Lavender—calming, good for migraines and restful sleep.
O Chamomile—calming.
Cream
O Natural progesterone cream—made from wild yam is good for PMS, menopause,
cramps and migraine. Apply it to the breasts or abdomen daily.
Nutritional healing
Eat well, dear woman. Your body needs to be fed properly to be
able to stay healthy. Nourishing your body needs to be one of your main
priorities. Be aware of destructive eating patterns which you may have
developed—eating instead of expressing, or even feeling, your
emotions, or dosing yourself with caﬀeine rather than resting.
Find which foods work for your body. Find your own rhythms for
eating—and be aware that these might not be what those around you
need, nor what you were brought up with.
Honour your body with every mouthful you take. Find your own
levels of enough. Discover your own levels of satisfaction. Depriving

[PDF page 94]

ourselves of real nourishment during the rest of the month leads to
nutritional deﬁciencies and intense cravings come moon time.
O Keep hydrated—drink lots of water and herbal tea.
O Water or fresh apple juice with fresh lemon juice, grated garlic and ginger is a powerful
tonic to support and cleanse the liver.
O Many women swear by green smoothies to boost energy, especially during moon time.
Add a large handful of leafy greens (spinach, kale, lettuce and perhaps some spirulina)
to your normal smoothie base of banana and juice, blend and serve.
O Consider taking supplements of B vitamins, especially B6 and B12, iron, zinc and
magnesium, especially leading up to menstruation, if you are breastfeeding or if you are
vegetarian.
O Zinc relieves cramps. It can be found in dark green vegetables, wild plants, seaweeds
and nuts.
O Eat lots of green leafy vegetables and dried fruits for iron to ensure you are
not anaemic.
O High protein foods such as meat, dairy, seeds, ﬁsh and chocolate contain tryptophan
—a mood boosting amino acid.
O The caﬀeine and sugar in chocolate lift your spirits—but they can also be migraine-
inducing or contribute to mood swings and adrenal fatigue, so watch out!
O Cut back on (or eliminate!) alcohol, sugar, caﬀeine and processed foods if you ﬁnd this
improves PMS symptoms.
O Many women ﬁnd that they have added cravings for simple carbohydrates and meat
approaching their moon time.
O If you struggle with abdominal cramps, bloating, diarrhoea and excess gas throughout
the month try cutting out all wheat for a few days and see if your symptoms improve.
O Some suggest that eating red meat at this time can make your bleeding heavier.
In everything you eat—honour yourself.
In every rest you take—honour yourself.
In how you spend your time—honour yourself.
In the people you spend your time with—honour yourself.

[PDF page 95]

In nourishing your body and soul with love and mindful awareness,
you learn to truly honour everyone and everything that your life touches.
Healing hands
Since ﬁrst writing Moon Time I have come across a number of
healing modalities which are aimed directly at the womb. I have neither
tried these, nor am in anyway aﬃliated with them, but oﬀer them
knowing many women who have experienced ﬁrst-hand relief
from them.
Massage
There are a number of diﬀerent techniques of abdominal massage
that are used to heal and support the reproductive organs, digestive
system and emotional health connected to these areas. They work by
correcting the position of organs, especially the womb, bowel and
bladder, and helping the ﬂow of blood and lymph. They can oﬀer
healing in an area where there is little other support including:
O menstrual cramps
O fertility issues
O polycystic ovarian syndrome
O menopausal symptoms
O prolapsed uterus
O scar tissue and adhesions from ﬁbroid tumours, endometriosis, and caesarean delivery
O post-partum healing
O bladder issues
O digestive problems including IBS
The Arvigo Techniques of Mayan Abdominal Therapy, based on
traditional Mayan techniques, is the longest established with
practitioners around the world. www.arvigotherapy.com
Fertility Massage, abdominal massage and other healing
modalities are combined to support fertility and women’s well-being.

[PDF page 96]

The content of the massage is carefully tailored to where you are in
your cycle. Worldwide. www.fertilitymassage.com
Mizan Therapy uses traditional healing techniques, including
abdominal massage to address conditions involving reproductive
organs, the digestive system and emotional health. (Currently UK
based only.) www.mizantherapy.com
Holistic Pelvic Health Care is a form of healing combining internal
vaginal massage, easing tension in the pelvic bowl, as well as energy
work on the female system. Founded by Tami Lynn Kent, a physical
therapist, based in Portland, Oregon (USA) who has trained
practitioners around the world in her techniques.
www.wildfeminine.com
Other more conventionally known healing modalities you may want
to check out include Bowen technique, cranio-sacral therapy,
osteopathy, acupuncture and chiropractic.
Womb Healing
Womb healings are oﬀered by Moon Mothers, trained under
Miranda Gray. They can help to heal and empower women emotionally,
return the menstrual cycle to balance and help menopausal women
embrace their new form of femininity.
Miranda also runs a free worldwide Womb Blessing ﬁve times a
year on the full-moon to help women connect with themselves and the
feminine. www.wombblessing.com
Vaginal Steams
The vagina is steamed over a herbal concoction, which is claimed
to ﬁght infections in the bladder, kidneys and vagina, regulate the
menstrual cycle, ease menstrual cramps, aid infertility, and clear
haemorrhoids, among many other health beneﬁts.
When it’s more than PMS

[PDF page 97]

Some women reading this might think—‘PMS sounds like a
breeze. I’m dealing with a whole other level of horrible.’
To you I say, please listen to your body. Please heed your
suﬀering. And go to your doctor. Love your body enough to have
someone else help you take the burden. There is no shame in a non-
healthy body.
There are many conditions which ﬂare up due to the hormonal
changes of the menstrual cycle, including:
O migraine
O depression and anxiety
O auto-immune conditions
If your mood swings take you into the self-harm or suicidal range,
please seek help straight away. Your suﬀering is real, it matters, but the
only way to make it better is by having the courage to seek support.
If you are struggling with heavy bleeding, intense pain, or other
persistent symptoms in your womb area, you need to contact your
doctor for further investigations. Do see someone. And then get a
second opinion. All of these issues can have major implications for both
your overall well-being but also your long-term fertility.
Endometriosis is a growth of womb lining in abnormal places, such
as attached to the ovaries, bowel or bladder. It is an extremely painful
condition that can cause infertility. And it’s as common as asthma or
diabetes, aﬀecting one in ten women of reproductive age. It can share
symptoms with other syndromes, such as IBS and so can be diﬃcult to
diagnose. Symptoms include:
O sharp, shooting, stabbing pains and cramping in the abdomen, pelvis and/or rectum
O pain during sexual intercourse
O extreme fatigue
O nausea

[PDF page 98]

O bloating
O diarrhoea and constipation
O excessive bleeding
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common endocrine system
disorder among women of reproductive age. Women with PCOS may
have enlarged ovaries that contain small collections of ﬂuid called
follicles. Common symptoms of PCOS include:
O obesity
O infrequent or prolonged menstrual periods
O excess hair growth on body and face
O male pattern balding
O acne
Uterine ﬁbroids are non-cancerous growths of the uterus that often
appear during the childbearing years. They are also sometimes
referred to as leiomyomas or myomas. As many as three out of four
women have uterine ﬁbroids sometime during their lives, but most are
unaware of them because they often cause no symptoms.
Common symptoms of ﬁbroids include:
O heavy or long menstrual bleeding
O pelvic pressure or pain
O frequent or diﬃcult urination
O constipation
O backache or leg pains
Many women avoid going to the doctor afraid of what might be found. If
you have concerns, please go. Take a friend, or your partner. Support
yourself in ﬁnding ways to best support your health and well-being.

[PDF page 99]

CELEBRATING THE SEASONS OF WOMANHOOD
At her ﬁrst bleeding a woman meets her power.
During her bleeding years she practices it.
At menopause she becomes it.
Traditional Native American saying
In our culture we have no formal way of celebrating the seasons of
our lives as women. Part of my work is in re-instigating and re-
imagining the sacred celebrations of womanhood. These important
steps on our paths and in our cycles go unmarked, and so we may
believe that they do not matter. But they do. And it is up to us to ﬁnd a
way to fully acknowledge and celebrate them. This might be in an
informal ceremony alone or a more elaborate celebration with a group
of women friends.
Ceremony can be healing. It can set a container in which new
visions, forms and identities can be grown.
A ceremony is a formal way of welcoming a new phase and
mourning or releasing an old phase. It is a way of making sacred our
bodies and their functions, and making meaning of our personal
journey, and sharing our human journeys together.
Female rites to celebrate
Here are the key rites of passage that most of us pass through in
our lives as women, (note how few are formally celebrated in our
culture):
O menarche (ﬁrst period)
O loss of virginity
O menstruation
O birthdays
O marriage or pair-bonding
O pregnancy
O miscarriage

[PDF page 100]

O abortion
O impending birth (mother blessing)
O birth
O closing of the bones after childbirth
O establishment of breastfeeding
O re-commencement of menstruation after birth (also after illness or coming oﬀ the pill)
O conscious end of childbearing
O weaning
O recovery from a major illness
O commencement of menopause
O last bleed
O retirement
O death
 
And you?
Which of these do you celebrate already?
Do you feel the lack of not having celebrated any of these in
the past?
Which would you like to celebrate in the future?
Are there any of your friends or family who are at an important
stage in their lives that you would like to help to celebrate?
How might you do this?
Creating ceremony
We are used to creating ceremonies in our culture...birthdays,
Christmas, weddings and funerals. But there are many, many important
life passages that go completely unmarked. Part of our re-weaving of
women’s culture is a claiming of these rites of passage as important
and ﬁnding ways to mark them which are meaningful to us.
You do not need to be religious, or even spiritual to create and
enjoy ceremony. Think of a birthday party—this is one of the most

[PDF page 101]

common rituals in our culture—we send out invitations, set a pretty
table, make a cake, light candles, blow them out, our friends sing us a
song, give us gifts and cards which are meaningful to us, wish us well
for the year ahead, perhaps make speeches and then share food with
us. A birthday party contains all the elements of the ceremonies I
mention in this book.
So even if you are new to ceremony, or a little uncomfortable with
the idea, chances are you have celebrated many, big and small, in your
lifetime already. And whilst it is easier to follow the well-worn traditional
rituals of birthday parties, because we (and our guests) know what is
expected, making new celebrations such as menarche, croning or
grieving rituals is exciting—as we are creating them fully in our own
images—with no expectations.
The most important thing about creating ceremony is not that you
follow rules—mine or anyone else’s—but that you follow your heart
regarding what needs to be said, done, acknowledged. Use the
ceremony as a container—a time and space to give words, symbolic
gestures, actions and visual expression to your unseen inner realms. A
ceremony should be an authentic reﬂection of, and container for, your
unique journey. It should only contain things which support your
process, not that make you feel uncomfortable or ‘not yourself’. That is
not to say they should be ‘easy’. They can be daunting and require
huge courage—this is to be expected. Rituals are a making real of
thresholds in our lives. But they should always be resonant with our
values, feelings and beliefs.
Planning a ceremony
Most ceremonies require a little planning and preparation. But
some of the best can be spontaneous and instinctive. Trust yourself
and the process.

[PDF page 102]

Set a meaningful time and space. It might be on an important day,
or a week, or month, or year’s anniversary from the special date you
are marking. It may held be at home, in your garden, a community
centre or in your favourite natural spot.
Ceremonies usually work best if one person, or a small team,
takes responsibility for planning and leading them. Get support for the
practical elements like setting up and organising activities.
Set your intention for yourself and the ceremony: that it may heal,
uplift, support and guide you (and all those that attend) during the
process of the ritual itself and in your life afterwards.
Before starting take time to allow yourself and all in attendance to
come fully into the moment, and remember the reason why you
are there.
Each ceremony should have the same basic outline:
O An opening: a time for participants to centre themselves and connect with the others in
the room. Setting the space.
O A celebration of the woman who stands before us, for all that she has been and
achieved thus far on her journey.
O A puriﬁcation and healing of all she would like to release before she embarks on the
next part of her journey.
O Making explicit her intentions and new commitments for her path ahead.
O Gifts, blessings, song, dance, words of power, symbolic actions, gestures of love
and support.
O A closing.
O And preferably breaking bread (feasting together)—to ‘ground’ or ‘earth’ the more
spiritual aspects of the ritual in the participants bodies, re-energise them, and bridge the
threshold between ‘sacred’ space and everyday life.

[PDF page 103]

MENARCHE: THE FIRST BLOOD
The reactions of the people close to a girl as she approaches her
ﬁrst period, are carried in her psyche. Whether we celebrate or
denigrate her determines the next several years of her life—her
adolescent identity. These same circumstances subtly inﬂuence all
succeeding physical emotional and psychological passages for the rest
of her life.
If she is joyously celebrated, she moves into adolescence self-
conﬁdent and proud of herself as a budding woman. If she is made to
feel ashamed of her body, she feels tainted with the shame and self-
loathing for being female.
Virginia Beane Rutter, Celebrating Girls
In the process of becoming ourselves more fully it is crucial to
reclaim our own personal stories and experiences, for in them we will
ﬁnd the seeds of healing.
Now that we have our own language for our bodies, and an
understanding of our cycles, let us go deeper in our work, to excavate
our lives and ﬁnd what lies beneath the surface. Let us enter our own
stories and reclaim our truth and power from them. The next chapter
will oﬀer the framework, and a living example of how to celebrate your
entry into womanhood anew—full of love, acceptance and celebration.
My story
The ﬁrst time I found out about periods was at school. Just before
leaving junior school each girl was issued with a little pocket-sized
booklet entitled Personally Yours. I still remember the cover, a fuzzy
anonymous image of a reclining girl with a blonde bob, pink jumper and
jeans. We were intrigued. We took them outside at lunch break and
three of us girlfriends lay on our backs, legs up to the ceiling in a
concrete crawling tunnel in the playing ﬁeld, and devoured this new
information. We were fascinated, not disgusted in any way. I remember

[PDF page 104]

thinking many years later that it was cunning marketing. The booklets
were compiled by Tampax. Of course they reassured us that we could
still swim or ride a horse: just use a tampon! I was reassured. It felt
exciting, but calm.
For me it was to be three years before I experienced it for myself. I
remember being in my ﬂute lesson. I felt muddle-headed, clumsy,
frustrated, and very vulnerable. I cried and cried. My poor, male
teacher was as kind and understanding as he could be, and said I was
obviously just having a ‘bad day’. I went to the toilet after the lesson.
And there, to my astonishment was copious red blood on the toilet
paper. I felt excited—a sense of knowing that this was a big deal for
me, for my life. A shift had happened.
School was over for the day. But it was a boarding school so I
would not be seeing my family until the weekend. It felt too momentous
to wait or do by phone. I needed to share that I was changed face-to-
face. I grabbed my best friend, we went out for a walk in the gardens
and I told her. It felt so right to share it with a female friend, and to do it
out in nature.
But being in boarding school also had its down sides. I felt a deep
shame. I didn’t want anyone else to know that I had my period. So I set
up elaborate coughing routines when I opened the crinkly sanitary towel
wrapper. I spent ages scouring leaks from underwear, and eventually
settled on black underwear all the time.
Only trusted friends knew when you were ‘on’. We used to watch
each other’s backs—literally. In the summer term we wore white and
blue striped skirts which showed leaks very easily. It was a sisterhood.
We had a special code word: ‘P’, which then, for reasons unknown to
me, became ‘Mr P’. Then because my father was Mr P, we called our
periods ‘Stephen’, after my dad. What irony to have a male period,
though we didn’t see that at the time!

[PDF page 105]

My mother cried when I told her. And I told my step-mother too.
They were both lovely and so good with any practical questions I had,
there was no awkwardness. I swore my step-mother to secrecy—she
was, after all, the sisterhood. But at some point, my father ﬁgured out
that I was menstruating, and was hurt that I had not told him. I got a ﬁve
page letter from him expressing this. What business is my blood of
yours? I wondered. I felt vulnerable for having my privacy, my secrecy,
broken, and by a man.
And so it continues to this day. My trusted sisterhood knows about
my cycles—it gives them insight into ‘where I’m at’, my husband
understands the intricacies of it too. But with everyone else it feels like
a sacred secret, which I don’t trust them so much with. For my sisters,
they know, they understand, they truly get it, because they’ve got it too.
We have each other’s backs.
And you?
Have you told the story of your ﬁrst time? Perhaps you would like
to do it in your journal, at a menarche celebration for yourself, on your
blog, to your daughter, to a close friend, at a women’s group, in a red
tent? Honour your experience.
What did you wish could have been diﬀerent? Can you make that
right for yourself now?
Celebrating menarche
First of all, it’s never too late. Whether you’re 19 or 49.
If you feel that your entry into womanhood was lacking and that
this still has an impact on your attitude towards your moon time or your
female body, it is never too late to create a menarche celebration
for yourself.
Simple steps for creating your own sacred menarche celebration
O Invite a circle of women to celebrate with you—your mother, sisters, friends,
daughters...

[PDF page 106]

O Decorate the space beautifully—red and white ﬂowers, candles, inspiring pictures,
drapes, incense—make it feel special and sacred.
O Dress in red or white to celebrate bleeding and fertility.
O Have a special welcome—perhaps walking under branches, or over scattered rose
petals. Have your hands and feet washed with rose water and your hair brushed.
O Sit in a circle with the other women according to where you are in your cycle.
O Read aloud an empowering women’s myth (see Reaching for the Moon, Red Moon,
Thirteen Moons, Women who Run with the Wolves for resources).
O Tell stories of your ﬁrst bleeding, how it felt, what it meant, how it was received.
O Have your head adorned with red ochre, or your hands or belly painted in henna.
O Join hands and sing or chant.
O Each create a red necklace or bracelet which you can wear to remember this day.
O Light a candle of blessing for yourself.
O Share food afterwards to ground the energy—you might choose red foods and fruits to
symbolise fertility.
If you create your own menarche celebration then you will not only be
serving yourself in healing and acceptance, but also the women whom
you involve in the planning and celebration. Furthermore it will allow you
to develop your vision for how you might celebrate your daughter or
other signiﬁcant girls in your life when their time comes.
By creating your own celebration ﬁrst there will be no sense of
jealousy of your daughter for having what you never had. Instead when
her time comes, it will be a pure oﬀering of love for her and an
embracing of her, rather than oﬀering her something that you wish for
yourself, which, if it is rejected or scorned, will feel doubly hurtful. And
in this awareness of her as Virgin and you Mother, you will be able to
both stand in your own power, in your own places in the circle.
Celebrating menarche for girls
If you are a mother of daughters you may want to allow the idea of
how to celebrate their entry to womanhood to gently percolate for a few

[PDF page 107]

years so that when the time comes you are not caught oﬀ-guard,
unsure of how to respond.
It is important to remember the sense of vulnerability we feel at
puberty about our bodies, and the need for privacy. Do not impose a
celebration on your daughter. Celebrate her as she is, in a way which
makes her feel special and loved, not in the way that you would have
wanted, or an intricate ceremony that the books suggest. It might be a
special dinner out, or a box of carefully chosen gifts on her pillow. Allow
for the fact that although you might want to share your wisdom, she
might not want to hear it!
Before embarking on planning a menarche celebration, take some
time to reﬂect—either in thought or by journaling your responses to the
following queries:
O Why do you want to celebrate her menarche?
O How do you want her to feel about her body, about being a woman?
O How does she feel about periods?
O How is your relationship with her at the moment?
O How would you like it to be?
O How was your relationship with your mother at her age?
O How is it now?
O Are you at peace with your own menarche? If not, what do you need for yourself ﬁrstly?
O Has she ever experienced—either ﬁrst-hand, or through hearing you talk—any sacred
feminine ceremonies? If she or you both are beginners to this, be very mindful of your
comfort zones.
Before planning anything, be sure to clarify your intention—everything
you plan should have the express and implicit intention of making
her feel:
O appreciated
O included

[PDF page 108]

O loved
O accepted
O special
O grown up
O welcomed into your circle of women
We often try to keep our precious babies as little girls. Use her
menarche celebration to show that she is growing into a woman and
that you honour and respect that.
If she has a godmother or aunt who is close, why not involve her in
the planning? If she doesn’t this might be a good opportunity to appoint
a godmother/moon-mother/mentor/auntie. This woman (perhaps a
friend of yours, or a mother of one of her friends) is asked to act as her
oﬃcial friend and mentor through her teen years when she may not feel
able to approach you, but needs the advice of an older woman whom
she (and you) respects and trusts. We all need many mothers in our
lifetimes—let her know that this is OK with you.
This is also a good time to tell her about fertility, her cycles and
perhaps more about sex, if you haven’t already, or deepen her more
basic knowledge. Help her to connect what objective knowledge she
has about fertility to her own body. Share with her the reality of her own
potential to nurture life, and with it the responsibilities. This must of
course be guided very much by her own level of maturity and your
family’s beliefs: a girl reaching her menarche at nine is at a very
diﬀerent place in her personal and sexual development to one who is
fourteen.
You might also choose to celebrate with an intimate circle of
friends and family. Or to share the celebration with other girls of the
same age. Perhaps you would both feel more at ease with a one-to-one
celebration. You might choose to involve others in this by asking your
close friends and family to send her gifts, letters and cards which you

[PDF page 109]

can present her with in private when her day of bleeding comes. Judge
it according to her feelings of sociability and comfort in groups or with
intimacy.
Activities to celebrate your daughter’s menarche
This is a list of possible activities—you do not need to try to do
them all!
O write her a letter
O get her ears pierced
O let her choose a daring new haircut
O give her a moon journal
O take her out to dinner
O have a special dinner at home
O give her ﬂowers
O make a cake
O buy her her own red towels
O make or buy her her own pouch for sanitary towels
O give her her ﬁrst handbag
O or a beautiful piece of jewellery to mark the occasion
O make her up with lipstick, Kohl and bright nail polish
O put together a box of goodies—perhaps a copy of Reaching for the Moon, a journal
and nice pens, some washable pads, a card with some words of love and a special piece
of jewellery. Some mothers put a box of gifts together over a few years, as they come
across special items, and to help spread the cost, and the pressure.
All of these activities seek to welcome your girl into the world of women,
doing and sharing ‘grown up’ activities with her as a means of loving
acceptance into the next stage of her life’s journey.
As her mother you might want to share with her your memories of:
O your ﬁrst period
O being a teenager

[PDF page 110]

O your pregnancy with her and her birth (or adoption)
You might also want to vocalise:
O your hopes and wishes for her in her life
O an acknowledgement of her growing beauty, power and spirit
O a conscious letting go of her as your little girl and an embracing of her as a young
woman forging her own life
All of this is a part of passing on narratives to the next generation,
passing forward their own stories, which we have acted as story-
keepers for until this point. And of course, it is another breaking of the
female silence.
All our children
Also crucially important at this time is for mothers of boys to ﬁnd a
way to gently and lovingly educate their sons into the mysteries of a
woman’s body and her cycles, to give him an accurate and respectful
understanding of female fertility which he will take out into the world
with him.
It is vital that we talk with other mothers about preparing our sons
and daughters for adulthood. It is not just ‘your problem’. We are all in
the same boat, and all hold part of the answer. So pool your resources,
work within your own community to ﬁnd ways to give meaning, and
meaningful information, to all our children who are coming of age.
OOO
Menarche: a journey into womanhood
by Rachael Hertogs
Rites of passage have begun to reappear in our society as we
recognise the importance of honouring our young people and guiding
them gently into adulthood. Ceremonies, vision quests, men’s and
women’s lodges, rite of passage courses, festivals and camps are
becoming more and more popular.

[PDF page 111]

I have been working with women and their daughters for many
years supporting them in celebrating their rite of passage.
The ﬁrst period is known as menarche. Tribal traditions have
celebrated menarche for thousands of years. Some rituals include the
whole tribe, others are more private, shared amongst close women
friends and family. Some are quite extreme, including genital mutilation,
cutting, scarring and tattooing, whilst others are more gentle—being
fed, massaged and sung to.
I believe how a young woman is guided through this experience
can aﬀect her for the rest of her life.
A modern menarche celebration
I have been taking part in the menarche ceremony preparation at
Sacred Arts Camp for a number of years—running workshops with the
young women and their mothers, teaching them about charting their
cycle, making moon necklaces, decorating red and white
candles...
What I love about this ceremony is that it is open to any woman
who hadn’t been celebrated at her menarche, as well as all the girls
who have recently begun to bleed. So the ages of those taking part can
be from ten to forty! It also involves the men, the grandmothers, the
very young girls—anyone who wants to join in can have a role.
All week women meet in my moon lodge tipi to co-create the
ceremony—deciding what songs will be sung, what dances to dance,
ﬁnding musicians, collecting red and white clothes for the women taking
part, choosing who will take which role...
Meanwhile the young women choose a Moon Mother who will
attend the ceremony with them holding their hand and reassuring them,
bringing them a gift, helping them to get ready. They might share blood
stories with them and as part of the ceremony they dream them a
‘moon name’ the night before the ritual.

[PDF page 112]

Many Moon Mother/Moon Daughter relationships continue years
after the ceremony—even though girls may choose a woman who they
only see once a year at camp! They also choose a Moon Father—
someone older who can be another ‘wise father ﬁgure’ in their life and
who will also make them a crown of leaves and ﬂowers for the
ceremony. The Moon Fathers have a powerful role in the ritual, bringing
in the male energy.
Other men of the community get involved too. They meet to
prepare—perhaps creating a song for the ceremony, as well as sharing
stories with each other about men’s traditions and honouring women.
Their part in the ceremony is to ‘guard’ the sacred ceremonial space by
dressing as ‘warriors’ and walking around the outside perimeter whilst
drumming and chanting.
The ceremony
Each year the ceremony is slightly diﬀerent. The ritual begins with
the decorating of the space. Our big top is draped with whatever cloths
and sheets we have, ﬂowers are placed in vases and jars, an entrance
is made from willow and ﬂowers. We light candles and incense and
raise the energy by singing and chanting while we decorate and
smudge ourselves with white sage.
All the women dress up: white if they haven’t begun to bleed yet,
red if they’re a bleeding woman and black/purple for the
menopausal women.
While this is happening the young women get ready with their
Moon Mothers in the moon lodge, being anointed with sacred water
and dressing in white, with a white ribbon in their hair.
Walking in to a big top ﬁlled with over 200 women singing is a
powerful experience! They sing and dance for the girls and their Moon
Mothers, and then leave to change the girls from white to red. As each

[PDF page 113]

one leaves the space, they turn and call out their name symbolizing
leaving the ‘girl-child’ part of themselves behind.
While we help them change in the moon lodge, the ceremony
continues with the passing of the ‘yoni cushion’ as a talking stick. As it
is passed, each woman who holds it speaks three words to summarise
their bleeding experience, words like: connected, pain, loss, renewal
and even ‘I’m not pregnant!’
After that songs and chants are shared until the young women re-
enter, dressed in beautiful red clothes. The singing continues in honour
of them and then there is the ceremonial hair cutting—once again
symbolising the letting go of their childhood. The hair with the white
ribbon is cut away and they are anointed with a red ochre crescent
moon on their forehead, to remind them of their moon connection and
the rhythm and ﬂow of the moon. They drink from the sacred goblet
(blackcurrant juice!) and the Moon Mothers step forward to bless them
with gifts and their new ‘moon names’ are whispered to them.
Now is the time for the men to enter! The Grandmothers have
been guarding the entrance the whole time and now step back to allow
the men in. But ﬁrst they are challenged: ‘Do you come in to this space
with love and respect for your sisters?’ To which of course they answer
yes!
The Moon Fathers step forward and crown their Moon Daughters,
as the rest of the men sing their song. In return, our gift to the men for
protecting our space is to share with them a blood mystery story, told
by one of our amazing storytellers. After that the musicians play, joined
by the drummers and it is time to celebrate and dance the
evening away!
The young women leave with their Moon Mums to go back to the
moon lodge for chocolate cake and to ground themselves after the

[PDF page 114]

ritual. Later that night we have a women’s sweat lodge—the perfect
ending to a wonderful day!
Reprinted with the author’s permission. A longer version of this
article ﬁrst appeared in Juno magazine in 2010.
 
Rachael runs a UK based website, Moontimes, which sells cloth
menstrual pads, books and a whole host of products related to
menstruation. She is the author of Menarche—a Journey into
Womanhood which includes articles and stories about menarche, ideas
for celebrations, tips for connecting to and charting your cycle, book
recommendations, poems and much more. She is also the creatress of
the yoni cushion mentioned in the ritual—see her website for photos!
www.moontimes.co.uk
www.rachaelhertogs.co.uk
www.sacredartscamp.org

[PDF page 115]

MENSTRUAL CEREMONIES
They say that salt water is the cure for everything—be it tears, a
swim in the ocean, a walk on the beach...or even a salt water gargle.
Water is the representative element for women—ﬂuid, ever-changing,
sometimes calm and reﬂective, sometimes turbulent and dangerous. If
you are feeling unsettled, water is often the most balancing element to
restore you to yourself. Just as the moon most strongly inﬂuences our
ﬂows, so it inﬂuences all water on the planet—the tides and even the
water uptake of plants.
Water can be used therapeutically in many diﬀerent ways:
O we can take it in through our senses—a walk on the beach or by a river
O sitting by a waterfall or garden water feature
O immersion by swimming, showering or sacred bathing
O imbibing it—through drinking tea, soup, an ice pop or just a big glass of water
O steam—through inhalation, in a sauna or simply for contemplation
Below I share with you two ways of transforming the simple acts of tea
drinking and bathing into sacred and mindful practices, which bring
calm and relaxation to your day and give you a little breathing space,
even in the busiest of lives. Both are wonderfully simple self-care
ceremonies to do in your pre-menstrual and menstrual phases.
Tea ceremony
As a busy woman ordinary days can often spiral out of control
making you feel exhausted and frazzled. Around your moon time this
can be totally overwhelming.
Many people drink tea as a refreshment, and for many their tea
times are a way of getting through the day—the combination of
caﬀeine, liquid and a much needed break revives them. My mother is
one of life’s tea drinkers; I, however, am not. I came to tea drinking late
in life and still I don’t enjoy a traditional cuppa with milk and sugar. It
was my time in Japan that brought home to me the ceremonial aspects

[PDF page 116]

of tea drinking, whilst the wise woman tradition established the healing
reasons for taking time to drink herbal tea.
So if you have a full day and really can’t oﬄoad any tasks, then the
tea ceremony is a centring, healing way of taking time out within a
normal day, helping to recharge you mentally and physically.
How to do it
O Firstly, give yourself permission to take 10–15 minutes for yourself. The tea ceremony
can be done with others, but the temptation is to chat and the calming, soothing energy
is dissipated.
O If you can expose yourself to a natural element whilst doing the tea ceremony, the
healing, calming eﬀect will be magniﬁed. If it is a ﬁne day then sit outside. Or if you have a
conservatory or some indoor plants in your oﬃce, sit there and absorb the earth energy. If
it is a blustery day like today as I’m writing this, sit by an open ﬁre and absorb the
ﬁre energy.
O Turn oﬀ your phone and do your best to ensure that you will not be interrupted.
O From the moment you turn on the tap to ﬁll the kettle, or enter the café, imagine you are
drawing a comforting bubble around yourself. Nothing, bar an emergency will enter this
and disturb you.
O Still your mind as the kettle boils. Close your eyes and take a few deep, aware breaths.
Choose your cup and tea according to your intuition—what do you need right now?
Perhaps a pretty cup to lift your feminine spirits, or a handmade earthenware mug that
feels solid and comforting. What tea do you need? (See the chapter on Herbal Healing
for a selection of nourishing women’s teas.)
O Pour the water over the herbs or tea bag and as you leave it to steep, watch the steam
spiralling upwards. Allow your thoughts and spirit to soar upwards with it, light, free and
unbounded. Breathe consciously and deeply and allow your body to settle and rest.
Check in with each part of your body from your toes to your head and release
any tension.
O When your tea is ready, cradle the cup in your hands, feel the warmth. Inhale the
aroma of the tea deeply. Then mindfully take your ﬁrst sip. Allow yourself to savour the

[PDF page 117]

taste, to really experience all the sensations of ﬂavour, warmth, moisture, as they enter
your body and infuse you. With each mindful sip allow your tiredness to seep away and a
sense of calm energy ﬁll you.
O Take a few moments before you are ﬁnished to bring to mind something you are
grateful for. I always ﬁnish my tea ceremony by being grateful for the water which makes
my tea, the herbs which grew in the earth, the healing herbal knowledge of people and
the time to reconnect with myself.
O Take your mindfulness, your calm, your soothed body gently back into your day.
Sacred bathing
Cultures around the world have used sacred bathing as a means
of puriﬁcation after menstruation—from Orthodox Jews to the
Japanese. Using candles, heady essential oils or cascades of bubbles,
relaxing music and a big ﬂuﬀy towel transforms a normal hygiene
routine into a ritual ﬁt for Cleopatra. I was reawakened to sacred
bathing recently by Shonagh Home’s Ix Chel Mysteries: 7 Teachings
from the Mayan Sacred Feminine.
I don’t like to take baths during my moon time. I have showers and
then a sacred, purifying bath when my bleeding has ﬁnished. This is
another form of steam meditation and water therapy, and one which I
look forward to every month.
How to do it
O Firstly, give yourself permission to take half an hour for yourself.
O Turn oﬀ your phone. If you have children, make sure they are being cared for so that
you do not need to be distracted. Occasionally I have managed to do this with toddlers in
tow—in which case set them up with an activity—perhaps ﬁlling cups in the sink or
stacking blocks on the ﬂoor where you can see them. Close the door so you know they
are safely contained in the bathroom.
O From the moment you turn on the tap imagine you are drawing a comforting bubble
around yourself. Nothing, bar an emergency, will enter this space and disturb you.

[PDF page 118]

O Still your mind as the bath runs. Close your eyes and take a few deep, aware breaths.
What scents do you need? Do you want bubbles or oils? (Be aware that the two do not
work together!) Perhaps strew some ﬂower petals on the water.
• Clary sage—brings clarity to the mind.
• Lavender—calming.
• Rose—good for anger.
• Geranium—calming.
• Neroli—soothing, good for weepiness or depression.
• Mandarin/orange—uplifting.
• Juniper—diuretic for bloating and swelling.
• Chamomile—calming.
• Add a scoop of Epsom salts to your bath for a real detox and mineral hit.
O Make it as hot as you can and as deep as you can. This is a bath for luxuriating in. Be
grateful that you have the water and fuel to be able to do this, hold in mind other women
in the world who do not and send some love and blessings their way.
O Light some candles and dim or turn oﬀ the lights.
O Choose some relaxing music, an empowering teacher’s CD, an audio of a guided
meditation. Or maybe just precious silence.
O Leave your ﬂuﬀy towel, bath robe, clean clothes or pyjamas warming on a nearby
heater. And have some slippers there too!
O As you take oﬀ your clothes imagine you are taking oﬀ the suﬀering of the day. Look
with love at your body. Stroke it gently, with great love and appreciation.
O Ease yourself gently into the bath. Lie back, take a deep breath into your belly, and
exhale deeply, imagining all the stress of the day leaving your body as you do. Close your
eyes and take a few more deep breaths. Feel yourself safe, warm and relaxed, contained
within a loving, nurturing womb.
O After a while, open your eyes and adjust to the dim light. Allow yourself to really
experience all the sensations of scent, warmth, moisture, as they surround your body and
infuse you.

[PDF page 119]

O Watch the steam spiralling upwards. Allow your thoughts and spirit to soar upwards
with it, light, free and unbounded. Breathe consciously and deeply and allow your body to
settle and rest. Check in with each part of your body from your toes to your head and
consciously release any tension.
O Gently and lovingly wash yourself from top to toe with a special loofah or sponge and
some indulgent shower gel or exfoliant. Be appreciative of each and every part of your
body as you wash it. Focus on the beauty and functionality of each part.
O Take your time emerging from the bath so as not to be light headed. Dry yourself with
loving care and attention. Moisturise or oil your skin and brush your hair.
O Take your mindfulness, your calm, your soothed body gently back into your day, being
sure not to catch cold.

[PDF page 120]

MOURNING MOON
Freeing the body inevitably leads to freeing the heart. Emotions
need to ﬂow like the blood circulating in the body. When our emotional
arteries are blocked, when our heart is jammed up, our whole life
lacks vitality.
Gabrielle Roth
It’s all very well to talk about welcoming your moon time. But what
if the splash of red is the last thing you wanted to see?
O Perhaps you are trying, and struggling, to get pregnant, and the appearance of your
period feels like conﬁrmation of another failure.
O Maybe your period means another round of expensive and exhausting IVF has failed.
O Or you are a few days late...or weeks...and you have mixed feelings about it.
O Perhaps you are hoping that you are pregnant, or know that you are. This is not just a
period, this is a miscarriage, and with it might come heartbreak, soul wrenching loss.
O Or it is a reminder of an abortion—wanted or unwanted?
O Maybe with moon time comes a lot of pain and suﬀering because of
health complications.
It is more important than ever at these times to follow the private moon
lodge/self-care process.
Techniques for dealing with loss
When we are suﬀering, physically or emotionally, our ﬁrst reaction
is usually to avoid or numb the pain. It is a basic instinct, rooted in our
desire to be free of suﬀering.
What I have learned, time and again, is that this is only a
temporary solution. The more we ignore it, the deeper it goes. The ﬁrst
step in healing physically or emotionally, is to feel our pain. To be there
with it. I don’t say this lightly: it is one of the hardest things in the world.
And often something that we cannot do alone. The ﬁrst thing we need to
be able to move into, and eventually through, our pain, is safety. A held
space, loving arms, an accepting listener. It may be a loved one, or a

[PDF page 121]

professional, but pets and even trees and places alone in nature can
provide this ‘holding’ that we need to be able to release what we are
holding on to.
Moon time is a natural time of loss, and the emotional ﬂow often
brings unhealed trauma to the surface. Can you ride its wave, allow its
dark energy to take your sadness and pain in its ﬂow? Allow your body
to scream out its sadness and frustration? How can you safely let your
feelings out, see them on the page, hear them out loud for what they
are, let yourself be witnessed and heard? How can you witness your
own pain? Allow yourself time and space to grieve, to mourn, to wail. It
is normal and natural and OK.
Some techniques that might help include:
O journaling your feelings
O making them into art—purge the images, feelings, words out of you creatively—pour
out your pain, uncensored and raw
O speaking with someone you trust—perhaps in person with a special friend, sister or
mother
O writing an email, letter or blog post
O phoning a support line, speaking to a trained, empathic stranger in complete
conﬁdentiality
O talking to your healthcare practitioner or counsellor, or ﬁnding one you can build a
trusted relationship with
O beating a pillow, or lying on your bed and thrashing your arms and legs
O singing, stamping, wailing, dancing, screaming—moving and vocalising however you
can
O dissolving into the sadness
O allowing yourself to be held, to be rocked and cradled like a baby and comforted
O allowing someone to brush your hair, to stroke your hand, to rub your shoulders.
Feeling that love and care and expecting nothing more from yourself than to be a conduit
of your feelings.

[PDF page 122]

O booking yourself a massage or bodywork, or allowing someone to gift this to you
O taking time to do a healing meditation or mindfulness practice
O wearing a ﬂower for remembrance
O keeping mementos—photographs, drawings, a symbol, a piece of clothing, a physical
reminder—close to you, in a locket, your handbag or on your dressing table, a private
shelf or drawer
O having a place in nature—the ocean, a special tree, a mountain—to go to when you
feel bereft
O picking or buying yourself some ﬂowers, making a garland or wreath
O holding a ceremony or ritual—either by yourself or with your partner, a close circle of
friends or your support group
A ceremony for loss
Set a meaningful time and space. It might be a week, or month, or
year’s anniversary from the date of your loss. It may be at home, in your
garden, at the place the loss happened, in your favourite natural spot.
No loss is too small, too insigniﬁcant. No date is too soon or too late.
Set your intention for yourself and the ceremony, that it may heal,
uplift, support and guide you during the process of the ritual itself and in
your life afterwards.
Take time to bring yourself into the moment, and remember the
reason why you are there. Bring to mind the loss that you are mourning
and hold it tenderly in your heart. Have an object with you to remember
your loss—perhaps a photograph or piece of clothing you associate
with the event.
Be aware of where in the process of grieving you are—are you
angry, sad, or simply needing to remember and pay respects? The
activities you choose to do in the ceremony will vary according to your
emotional state—if you have a lot of pain or anger, then drumming,
ripping, tearing and movement might be what you need to release the
intensity. If it is more sadness, then words or images might be all you

[PDF page 123]

need to allow your emotions to ﬂow and release so that you can
experience healing.
O You may want to sing, chant, drum, scream, yell.
O Bury or burn something in the ground to represent your loss—perhaps a clay ﬁgurine,
a journal page, a drawing full of pain. Watch the smoke rise and ﬂoat oﬀ. Feel the earth
on your hands.
O Rip a piece of fabric or paper to symbolise your hurt and feeling of being torn apart.
Tear paper into tiny pieces and throw the pieces to the wind.
O Pause. Allow the feeling of release, the feeling of connection to the earth, to the
processes of life going on all around you. Notice that your clay or paper or the smoke is
already in the process of transforming into a new form: new soil or air that in turn
supports new life.
O Do something that speaks of new life—plant a tree or seed.
O Read aloud a blessing, prayer, inspiring piece of writing or invocation.
O Speak aloud your hopes and dreams and vision of the future.
O Finish with a song or a favourite piece of music which ﬁlls you with hope and joy.
O Ground your energy by holding hands, eating and drinking and resting.
It is real. It is allowed. It is enormous.
It is not the end of everything.
Even though it might feel like it.
You will never forget.
But you can heal, you will heal.
If your loss was a while ago, do not be surprised if these feeling re-
emerge every moon time. Take the opportunity each time to work
through them more deeply, to heal yourself a little more, so that you
might free yourself from being bound to them.
Allow that as your blood ﬂows, your tears ﬂow too. Allow yourself to
empty, to shed a skin, to feel the darkness and be in that place. Allow

[PDF page 124]

the release. Trust the emptiness. The liminal. The in-between space of
not knowing. Honour yourself deeply in your numbness, your pain, your
fear, your anger.
And then, as your body begins its journey to ripeness and fertility
once more, allow yourself to follow your body’s lead back into the light,
embracing life in its fullness and renewed possibilities.

[PDF page 125]

RED TENTS AND MOON LODGES
At best, the Red Tent Temple times are like homecomings for us.
ALisa Starkweather, foundress of the Red Tent Temple Movement
Red tents are a place where women are allowed to Be rather than
continually Do.
DeAnna L’am, menstrual educator
Around the world a new consciousness is springing up, a yearning
to honour our female experience, to make spaces and communities that
support and nourish us as women, and to create new rituals to replace
those long ago lost.
The red tent is one such idea that resonates strongly with many
women. In sharing the concept of red tents and moon lodges, I hope to
inspire you to create your own. With that in mind I want to share with
you a variety of voices from around the world—brave souls who are
visioning a more beautiful, creative, empowered way of being a woman.
What is a red tent?
The idea of the red tent was introduced by Anita Diamant in her
book The Red Tent, published in 1997. She brings to life a group of
central female ﬁgures in the Bible whose lives were glossed over by
male Old Testament authors. She re-imagines the old Canaanite ways
in the time of Abraham, where women who were menstruating or about
to give birth were secluded for a few days in a red tent. There they
would bleed onto the earth and be relieved of all domestic
responsibilities. This was where they shared their wisdom, cared for
themselves and each other and initiated girls into the rites of
womanhood.
Red tents today tend to have no religious or spiritual aﬃliation, and
bring together women from all belief systems and none. Nor are they
places where you go for several days to bleed, but rather are a monthly
women’s space, held for retreat and community.

[PDF page 126]

A moon lodge or bleeding lodge is a similar idea, but comes from
the Native American tradition. It is a place that a woman goes to
descend into her depths during her moon time, to be still and
experience the magic available to her at this time.
When women started to bleed, they left their homes and families to
go to the sacred introspective space of the Bleeding Lodge. The Lodge
was honoured and respected by the entire community, for the dreams
and visions of the bleeding women brought vital survival information
such as planting and healing knowledge and guidance on community
relations. When there were questions that needed to be answered, the
women would go to the Lodge and ask the Ancestors. All questions
were always answered by the Ancient Ancestors. The entire community
beneﬁted through the powerful gifts of the women’s bleeding cycle.
Since our Ancient Grandmothers probably all bled together, many
women shared the Womb Lodge at one time. Ceremonies to honour our
womb cycles, celebrate the cycles of the Earth and Moon, and rites of
passage were developed by these women from visions and dreams
during their bleeding times in the Sacred Lodge. These traditions were
passed down in the initiatory rites of the Blood Lodge from mother
to daughter.
Songs of Bleeding by Spider
Since ancient times women have gathered together at the dark
moon to dream mystical dreams, share wisdom and renew sexual
power. Sitting in circle within The Red Tent, they are relieved of their
daily responsibilities and cared for by other women. All working and
doing aside, together they explore the secrets of the cosmos through
the gateway of their wombs. They feed their femininity and emerge
refreshed, renewed and empowered by what they have shared and
witnessed.

[PDF page 127]

In the warm, cosy space of The Red Tent, you will be nurtured by
ancient restorative practices, giving the body, heart, and mind space to
rest in stillness, revitalizing your receptivity to life and love. You’ll be
enchanted by stories, old and new, of Woman and her mysteries. You’ll
be fed warm soups, vibrant greens, teas: you will be loved from the
inside out. You will have the space, the time, the encouragement to
simply Be.
Dawn Cartwright,
www.chandrabindutantrainstitute.com
The dark moon phase, three days a month when we cannot see
the moon in our night’s sky, was once considered a blessing. In
traditional Native American culture, women gathered together in moon
lodges...to rest, meditate, heal, let go of the unwanted and celebrate
womanhood. They were considered very powerful and they were
expected to vision for the whole tribe, helping the Elders with decision
making and foresight into the future.
Jane Anderson,
www.moonandearthconnections.com
Though they are often spoken about interchangeably, it is my
understanding that there is a vital diﬀerence between a moon lodge and
a red tent.
A moon lodge is one which honours and allows introspective
practices: dreaming, prayer, trance work, visioning and journaling. It
can be undertaken with women together, but is often done alone.
Moon lodges have been in continual use within the Native
American tradition for generations, and use distinctive Native American
language, myths and an austere physical framework. They have been
introduced to women in America and beyond in recent years by native
elders, as well as Susun Weed and her publishing house, Ash Tree.

[PDF page 128]

A red tent is a more communal activity and experience usually in
ornate surroundings—one which, whilst allowing for rest and
introspection, allows a forum for sharing knowledge, creative activities,
ceremony and interaction.
These have been seeded and championed around the US by
ALisa Starkweather via the Red Tent Temple Movement, and DeAnna
L’Am through Red Tents in Every Neighborhood, as well as
independently by a number of other visionary women in Europe and
Australia.
The herstory of the emergence of red tents is documented in an e-
book by ALisa Starkweather and Isadora Leidenfrost, The Red Tent
Movement: A Historical Perspective as well as in a powerful ﬁlm
documentary, Things We Don’t Talk About: Healing Narratives from the
Red Tent.
My heart, like yours probably, has been aching when I look into my
local area, my world, and see such a great need for the sacred. I see an
unmet need in our young to have a place they can count on for
mentoring, initiation, and coming into their womanhood with other
women. I see an unmet need in our lives to connect deeply, rest and
take time to simply be. I see an unmet need for our elders where they
can gather to be honoured and share their wisdom.[...] And I wondered
what would happen in our societies of local places if women were to
have a place we could count on where we are respected, supported
and held. I understood from the work that I do that to empower women
of any age means to bring health back into a community. And the Red
Tent Temple Movement is a means to support us.
ALisa Starkweather, at the founding of the Red Tent Temple
Movement
A red tent...

[PDF page 129]

O is part of the spiritual practice of menstruation and the living of the wisdom of the
cycles. (Jane Hardwicke Collings)
O creates a supportive community of women
O creates a much needed retreat space
O honours our bodies with time and self-care
O provides a venue for sharing women’s wisdom and celebrating rites of passage
O creates a woman-centred sacred space within our lives and the world
They are springing up around the world in private homes, yurts, festival
tents, community halls and dedicated purpose-built rooms. Often
draped in red, with beautiful embroidery, soft cushions, prayer ﬂags,
rugs, quilts and paintings, they seek to create a soft, welcoming womb
where women can come and speak, cry, sing and laugh, where women
share healing, body work, energy work, nourishing meals and herbal
tea.
Some temporary red tents have been created for V-Day
celebrations, art installations and educational projects. Others are more
structured women’s circles which meet monthly. Some are open to all
women in the community, others have a closed membership. Some
welcome pre-pubescent girls once a year and run menarche
celebrations when their girls come of age.
They are generally held on the new moon, as this is the traditional
time of women’s bleeding. But you do not have to be bleeding to go to
one, if your own moon time is on a diﬀerent cycle, if you are pregnant,
do not have periods or a physical womb. They are a space for all who
identify as female. The new moon is often a time for sowing the seeds
of intentions that we wish to manifest as the moon waxes, so whether or
not you are bleeding it is a good time to go.
What happens at a red tent?
All sorts of things can happen at a red tent:
O talking circles

[PDF page 130]

O hands-on healing
O creativity and art
O silence, meditation and reﬂection
O seasonal activities
O sleep and rest
O reading and journaling
O hugging, laughing, crying, holding
O ceremonies and rituals
O singing, dancing, chanting, drumming
O pampering
Some red tents are free-form, and others are more facilitated
experiences. How yours is depends on the wishes and needs of your
group of women, and the skills and comfort-zone of the women
involved. Some women who are new to women’s work, or deal with
social anxiety ﬁnd being in a group of women deeply uncomfortable and
need a ﬁrm structure to support them. Others have a fear of leadership,
little experience in group work, or a desire to simply show up and trust
the process, so a free-form group works better for them. Or you can
alternate, and have a free-form session one month, and a more
structured talking circle or facilitated activities the next.
ALisa’s words which follow are particularly powerful for me. Our
red tent dissolved because of diﬀering judgements over how a red tent
‘should’ be.
It is very important that we don’t shame or hurt one another in the
Red Tent Temples by our judgements about what we think ‘should’
happen. With time, with focus, with learning, with dialogue in our
circles, with experience, trust that we are going to ﬁnd our way.
At the same time we help the situation with an orientation sheet
about what this is. It helps to invite them into a quiet space. Soft music,
a place to close one’s eyes and centre, a welcoming that invites each

[PDF page 131]

woman to let go of her nervousness, her work, her need to belong and
be accepted, and simply come home to herself wherever she is.
It is okay to ask women as they enter to have some quiet time ﬁrst
before getting involved with talking. Talking happens. In the Red Tent in
my home, there is quiet talking, nap taking, sometimes tears and often
laughter. If you have a crystal bowl or gentle bells that can be struck
every once in a while as a way for the room to go within, quiet for a few
moments, you can interrupt the pattern in a gentle way of it becoming
louder and louder.
Women are not going to be comfortable at ﬁrst with the idea of
doing nothing. I have had very powerful women friends who are very
active come into the Red Tent and look like a cat in water. The look
says, ‘what am I doing just sitting here? I should be home DOING
something.’ But that is the point. We are learning the undoing and for
that we look like drowned cats momentarily. Soon those same women
are stretched out on the pads or receiving energy work or are
journaling, sipping tea, and breathing more deeply. It is really a learning
experience here.
www.ALisastarkweather.com
Creating a red tent
So you want a red tent for yourself?
Firstly check online, in local health food shops, yoga spaces,
holistic centres or your library to see if there is already one near you.
Check the Resources section at the end of this book—the groups on
Facebook will be able to let you know of any in your area.
If there isn’t one you will need to brainstorm—perhaps by yourself,
or more fun with a few like-minded women. Taking time to vision
together, rather than rushing in to setting one up can alleviate problems
at a later stage, if there are major diﬀerences of intention, or levels of

[PDF page 132]

work that people are prepared to put in. There are many, many ways a
red tent can be run, and what can happen in them.
Holistic visioning:
O Who is it for and why? What is your grandest vision?
O What do you/don’t you want? What is crucial? What is a deal breaker?
O What is your one over-riding priority? Community? Retreat? Beauty? This will help to
steer you when you feel confused and at sea.
O What do you like from the ideas here?
O What don’t you like/want?
Practical visioning:
O Where to hold it?
O What date?
O What time?
O How long will the sessions be?
O What will you use to decorate it? Where will these things come from? Use what you
have, borrow, get creative re-fashioning old bits of fabric.
O Invitation only or posters?
O Who to invite and do they need to RSVP?
O What do they bring? Refreshments, cushions...
O Ensure at least two to set up and two to clear up.
O Any activities for the tent.
O Any formal leadership structure.
O Will you have an online group as well or instead? Private Facebook groups are free
and easy to set up.
O Will you charge? If so, how much?
ALisa Starkweather hosts a free monthly telecall to support women
wanting to establish a red tent in their neighbourhood. And the Red
Tent Network and Red Tent movie websites have lots of useful
resources. DeAnna L’Am has held a free Red Tent Teleconference in

[PDF page 133]

February for the past two years, and also runs paid tele-classes to
support women who are setting them up.
Do seek out images of red tents online to inspire you. Pinterest is a
great source of them—check out my Red Tent board for starters
pinterest.com/dreamingaloudnt/in-the-red-tent
Decorating a red tent
Most red tent leaders try to recreate the look and feel of a red tent
in an internal room. You can do this with:
O curtains
O sheets
O drapes
O blankets
O sari fabric
You can get these from:
O your own cupboards, attics, drawers
O friends, family and neighbours
O dye old sheets red
O buy cheap red sheets from thrift stores, charity shops, retail discounters
O eBay has a great choice of very aﬀordable sari fabric
Or you can have an actual tent space—in a yurt, tipi or a bell tent
(which are much more aﬀordable than yurts, and quicker to put up, but
have the same feel). A cheaper option still, and one which is quick to
put up and can be used inside or out, is a gazebo. You can use it as is
or with added drapes.
Creating and adorning a space
Equipment you might need includes:
O cushions, beanbags and futons for sitting on the ﬂoor
O a kettle, cups, teas

[PDF page 134]

O candles, incense, essential oils, smudge stick
O a portable self-care kit—lavender eye mask, hot water bottle or barley bag, a couple of
favourite oils and base oil, a foot-bath
O a portable shrine or altar—with images and objects which are meaningful to you and
help you to connect with your feeling of sacredness
O a creative bag (journal, pens, paints, old magazines for collage)
Ensuring your red tent is sustainable
I just want to take a moment, if you are excited about starting a red
tent of your own, to caution you to make it sustainable—ﬁnancially
and energetically.
A red tent or any women’s group is a labour of love—but should be
of many women’s love, not just one. Do not work yourself to the bone
creating a perfect retreat space for others. After all, you are creating it
not just for your community—but for you as well! So ensure that you
have support or shared responsibility for:
O set up
O clean up
O ﬁnances and administration
O refreshments
O hosting
Guidelines for a sustainable red tent
O Do not do it all yourself and wear yourself out. Allow others to help in serving your
community, and in serving you!
O Don’t worry about making it perfect. Just make it with love, and aim for beauty and it
will be wonderful. Consider it a work in progress which will grow with you all, using the
skills and energy of all its members—as it sustains you, so you sustain it.
O Get support and advice from other women who have gone before you—join an online
group or take part in the Red Tent Temple calls.
O Ensure your decorations are quick, or at least pleasurable, to set up!

[PDF page 135]

O Make sure not to try to cram in too many activities or ideas—remember ﬁrst and
foremost a red tent is a place to be.
O Be gentle with yourself in its creation. There are many who may sneer or denigrate
your sacred project. I have many of these people around me. They do not need to know
about it, whilst you still feel tender and vulnerable. If you feel concerned, keep it private
and discrete.
O It is a sacred space, share it with only those who will honour it as such—ensuring the
emotional safety of all who enter it. Ensure you have a clear code of conduct for how
women should be in this space. Ours was:
• Speak from my ‘I’—rather than for others.
• Share openly and honestly, as much or as little as you need.
• Request at the beginning of each session that women let what emerges in the tent, to
stay in the tent—no gossiping or sharing other’s stories outside the red tent space.
• Everyone is responsible for their own feelings, for asking for what they need and what
they bring into the space.
• Everyone is responsible for doing what they can to help the smooth running of
the group.
O Be clear on how new women are invited. Will you put up posters, or simply have it
amongst a closed group of friends? If it is in a person’s home then the size of room, and
people’s privacy might demand that it is invitation only and that people RSVP.
O Agree in advance how misunderstandings and disagreements will be dealt with by
the group.
The more sustainable your red tent is, the longer it will be there to
support you and your community. It is a precious resource to all
involved, but there is much learning that happens in the process of
creating, and sustaining, a group.
Creating your own moon lodge
The original moon lodge consisted of a woven hazel branch frame
with a cover made of hides, blankets or cloth—a similar type of

[PDF page 136]

construction to a sweat lodge. They tend to be much simpler and less
ornate than red tent spaces.
I have visions of creating a moon lodge in the tea house where this
book was written, and where I was married. It is a beautiful hand-
constructed space nestled in the woods with thick plastered walls, a
thatched roof, round ﬁre place and panoramic views over the marsh
and sea. Being just one room it feels like a safe womb. It smells of
sweet cedar and incense. There are lots of big cushions, comfy chairs
and warm woollen blankets. In short it spells comfort and retreat for me.
But when I can’t get there in person, I recreate this feeling in my
bedroom at home.
A dear friend is creating a moon lodge in an abandoned woodland
hut. She will let other trusted women know of this space, so that they
too can retreat to it when they need. Another woman I know has a
summer house which is used for this purpose over the warmer months
of the year.
Lodges which are used by many women often keep a lodge book
where any woman can share her insights, visions or dreams—these
may support another woman in her own process, as well as give
material for contemplation.
OOO
Most of us do not (yet!) have a moon lodge or red tent space in our
neighbourhoods. And for many of us our moon time is private—we
have no desire to step outside our front doors or be sociable.
Perhaps setting up a red tent is not for you, or not feasible right
now. Perhaps you do not yet have a circle of likeminded women to
share in creating one. Perhaps you feel like you do not have the
resources. Or perhaps you just need the courage to act on your
dreams.
We are the ones we’ve been waiting for!

[PDF page 137]

OTHER KEY CEREMONIES FOR WOMEN
We have already explored menarche and moon time ceremonies,
as well as touching on mourning rituals. Before we close I wanted to
share a few more important ceremonies connected to our cycling years
which are so often overlooked in our culture. You might choose to
celebrate them privately, with a close friend, your red tent or
women’s group.
Red thread ceremony
For many diﬀerent ceremonies that I have been fortunate to lead—
at women’s groups, red tents, and mother blessings—many women’s
most treasured part is the red thread ceremony. This is a way of
symbolically connecting the women in the group, leaving them with a
lasting visual reminder of the ceremony. It is usually the last activity of
the event, done in the closing circle.
How it works
You will need a ball of red wool (yarn) and a pair of scissors.
All the women stand in a circle. The leader tells the group of the
symbolism of the red thread, which is found throughout cultures. In
Chinese stories it was said that there is an invisible red thread which
binds people who are destined to meet. In women’s cultures it is said
that the red thread symbolises our shared menstrual blood, which
unites and connects all women. We bind ourselves together with the
ball of wool to remind ourselves of the web of interconnections that link
us all, so that even when we are no longer in the same room, we
remember our connectedness.
The leader wraps the end of the wool around her own wrist (in
some ceremonies the wool is ﬁrst tied around the central candle,
symbolising our connection to spirit or the centre) and then throws the
ball of wool across the circle—perhaps with a word of blessing, or
something that she is taking away from being in circle. The next woman

[PDF page 138]

wraps it a couple of times around her wrist and throws it to a woman
across from her until all the women are bound together by the red
thread in sisterhood.
The leader invites everyone to take a step back, to feel the
connection between them as the threads tighten: this is the support we
all have to call on. She then cuts herself free, leaving herself ample yarn
to wrap another couple of times around her wrist and knot into a simple
bracelet. She passes the scissors on, each woman snipping her ties.
The women are reminded to remember the feeling of sisterhood,
centredness and support each time they look down at their red cord
band in the coming days.
In a mother blessing ceremony each woman is asked to leave her
bracelet on until the safe delivery of the baby, and to send thoughts of
love and blessing to the mother when they look down at it.
A return to bleeding
Whether you are welcoming the return of your cycle after child
birth, taking the pill, or illness, take time to mark this event and
reacquaint yourself with your cycles. You might choose to:
O take some of your moon blood and pour it on the earth or onto one of your favourite
plants
O pick or buy yourself some ﬂowers
O dedicate your bleeding time to yourself, to all women, to learning more about yourself,
your spirit, your fertility each month
O make a piece of art or write a poem to mark the event
O make yourself a cake or a favourite meal
O take yourself out to a café
O treat yourself in some other way—get a massage or a pedicure or body work treatment
O attend a red tent
Mother blessing

[PDF page 139]

Mother blessings are a great alternative to baby showers for those
more mindful of the spiritual and physical journey to motherhood. A
mother blessing celebrates, nurtures and supports a mother-to-be in
her late pregnancy preparing her emotionally for her impending birth. It
is usually a profound experience which closely bonds the mother-to-be
and all who participate in it.
Pregnancy and birth are such enormous milestones in any
woman’s life, but as a culture we tend to barely acknowledge them.
Many women ﬁnd themselves approaching birth feeling unprepared for
what to expect, or feeling isolated from the support of mothers, sisters
and other women. Mother blessings answer this need and celebrate a
woman’s rite of passage into motherhood.
Originating in the Navajo Native American tradition of
Blessingways, mother blessings have been developed in the US over
the past 15 years amongst the alternative community and are gaining
popularity in Europe and Australia now.
Organised and led by a friend or celebrant, the pregnant woman’s
closest female friends and relatives (usually six–twelve women) gather
at her home for a simple ceremony some time in her last six weeks of
pregnancy. Though spiritual in their outlook, mother blessing
ceremonies do not adhere to any particular dogma or creed. Each is
unique to the woman it celebrates and is tailored to her particular
beliefs and circumstances. Activities might include:
O opening by lighting a candle, saying a short prayer or blessing
O sharing how you know the mother-to-be and what she means to you
O giving gifts: little indulgences for the mother, babysitting vouchers, organising a ‘meals-
on-wheels’ rota for post-birth
O sharing positive birthing stories, poems and readings
O having a guided meditation
O or a ritual for facing fears to do with the birth and mothering

[PDF page 140]

O stringing birthing beads: each woman adds one and shares her own birthing story
O creating a birth vision board of inspiring images and quotes for labour
O creating prayer ﬂags—each with a message of support or power symbol
O pampering the mother—massaging her, brushing and braiding her hair, painting her
toe nails
O making a plaster cast of her belly or painting it with henna or face paints
O giving out candles to be lit when labour starts and organising a ‘phone tree’ to spread
the news on the big day
O closing with the red thread ceremony
O ending with a shared feast
Closing the bones
A closing the bones ceremony is inspired by a Mayan tradition
where the post-partum mother is anointed, massaged and wrapped in
fabric. This process literally helps to ‘close’ the mother’s body
physically and energetically, after the opening which has happened on
every level in preparation for and during birth itself.
It is a deeply nourishing, nurturing process, which acknowledges
the new mother’s vulnerability and need for physical and emotional
support, at a time where in Western culture she is pretty much
abandoned. I wish I had known about them when I was having my
babies, as I know they would have helped the healing of my pelvis and
lower back, as well as potentially headed oﬀ post-natal depression.
The ceremony is led by a trained healer—often a doula,
ceremonialist or someone trained in the Arvigo tradition of abdominal
massage, and as well as hands-on healing, provides a beautifully held,
nurturing space for the mother. Things that might be included are:
O a ritual or ceremony—welcoming and acknowledging the mother
O a vaginal steam bath with ﬂowers and herbs to bring her energy back into her body
and ﬁnish healing the post-partum womb
O abdominal massage, reiki, cranio-sacral or sound healing

[PDF page 141]

O wrapping of the lower back and pelvic area using a rebozo
O belly binding, which aids the shrinkage and internal repositioning of the uterus and
bladder, supporting the pelvis and lower back as they return to their original positioning
The purpose and intention is to allow a woman to heal from the birth,
and to support her moving into her motherhood, physically and
emotionally free.
Croning ceremony or wise blood rite
For women in our society aging is often portrayed as a negative
thing. Croning ceremonies are a wonderful way to celebrate the journey
beyond our fertile years and welcome a woman into her wisdom years.
The feelings and physical shifts that emerge at this time are
honoured. Ceremonies can range from spontaneous celebrations at
birthday parties to pre-planned ceremonial rites of passage. Some
ceremonies are personal, others are shared amongst an intimate circle
of friends and family, and others are large public rituals at women’s
gatherings. The ceremony tends to be performed by a woman who has
already passed through menopause herself, but can of course be done
by and for yourself. Activities can include:
O a story or guided meditation honouring the archetype of the Wise Woman
O symbols of initiation—a shawl, a wreath of ﬂowers or leaves, a henna tattoo, a
medicine bag
O songs, drumming, music or poetry celebrating the later years of womanhood
O an altar with photos of female relatives and friends who have empowered you
O a symbolic acting out of the passage into cronehood, perhaps entering through a
curtain or tunnel, or removing three veils representing each life stage: Maiden, Mother,
Crone
O lighting a purple candle, the colour of wisdom and mature spirituality
O some women choose to adopt a new name at their croning ceremony. It can be one
that you keep to yourself, share only among friends, or announce to the world
O an exchange of gifts or blessings

[PDF page 142]

O a celebratory feast
Celebrating women will change the world
However you choose to mark these rites of passage, what is
important is that we acknowledge these life transitions ﬁrst for
ourselves, and then for our sisters, daughters, friends and wider
communities. It is vital that we ﬁnd ways of talking about these rites of
passage, healing and supporting ourselves and the women that we
know as we pass through the archetypes of womanhood, rather than
numbing and ignoring them as we have for so long in our culture.
Celebrating ourselves, we learn once again to value each stage of
our lives as women, we learn to celebrate and respect the cycles of
nature that we are intimately connected to. We see that we are not
separate from nature—or each other. This is vital to our physical and
emotional health—individual and communal. These small steps of self-
care and celebration hold within them profound seeds of healing and
change for the world.
If you have ever wondered if you can make a diﬀerence, you can.
And this is both the simplest and most meaningful and
profound diﬀerence.
More than anything else, learning to live at ease in your body, to
care for it, to create consciously in harmony with the cycles of nature, to
nurture the life you bring through you, to heal and support yourself. That
is perhaps your greatest power. It all starts with you and your
wise body.
And you can do it.
Right now.

[PDF page 143]

AFTERWORD
What a journey this has been for me—and for you too I hope!
What learning, what courage and insight we have unearthed on our
travels together. What wisdom we have in our bodies and in women’s
cultures that we can bring into our lives today.
Thank you for your companionship on the journey. I wish you well
as you travel onwards.
If you have enjoyed this book do leave a review on your favourite
retailer, and consider buying a copy for friends, daughters or sisters.
Please join me at
O thehappywomb.com
O Facebook /The Happy Womb
O Pinterest /dreamingaloudnt/the-happy-womb/
for a whole host of further Womancraft resources.
Blessings to you,
Lucy Pearce,
Cork, Ireland, April 2015.

[PDF page 144]

RESOURCES
Online resources
Charting
www.lorraineferrier.com/resources
For free charting resources and tuition
www.menstruation.com.au/fertility/mychart.html
Blank fertility chart
www.thebillingsovulationmethod.org
Fertility awareness from the original discoverers of The Ovulation
Method—free e-books and charts (go to their resources section)
Charting apps
My Moon Time
www.menstruation.com.au/menstrualproducts/hormonalforecaster.
html
Sources of moon diaries and charts
www.wemoon.ws
www.earthpathwaysdiary.co.uk
www.moontimes.co.uk
www.herbalmedicinehealing.com
www.moonandearthconnections.com
www.wisewoman.org
www.moontimerising.com
Leading women in the ﬁeld of menstrual education
www.lucyhpearce.com and www.thehappywomb.com
(Lucy H. Pearce)
www.womensquest.org and www.redschool.net (Alexandra Pope)
www.moonsong.com.au (Jane Hardwicke Collings)
www.moontimerising.com (Giuliana Serena)
www.thesassyshe.com (Lisa Lister)
www.janebennett.com

[PDF page 145]

www.laraowen.com
www.rachaelhertogs.co.uk
www.susunweed.com
www.mirandagray.co.uk
www.alisastarkweather.com
www.deannalam.com
Woman honouring websites
www.dreamingaloud.net
www.optimizedwoman.com
www.wombyoga.org
www.cherishthecunt.com
www.holisticmenopause.com
www.fertilitymassage.co.uk
www.chandrabindutantrainstitute.com
www.thefullmooneﬀectppc.weebly.com
www.crimsonwisdom.com
www.talkbirth.com
www.redwebfoundation.org
www.yoni.com
www.onewoman.com
www.menstruation.com
www.womansoul.co.uk
www.pixiecampbell.com
www.crimsoncampaign.org
www.wellspringswomen.com
www.womboﬂight.com
www.goddessrising.org
www.redwisdom.co.uk
www.wisewomenredtent.com
www.thefountainoﬂife.org

[PDF page 146]

www.thesacredwomb.com
www.birthdance.co.uk
www.nurturehealth.info
Red tents and moon lodges
The Red Tent—Anita Diamant
The Red Tent Movement: A Historical Perspective—
Isadora Gabrielle Leidenfrost, PhD and ALisa Starkweather
www.alisastarkweather.com—for detailed insight in to the ‘what’
and ‘how’ of red tents. ALisa founded the grassroots Red Tent Temple
Movement in 2007.
www.redtenttemplemovement.com—a grassroots movement
aiming to bring a red tent to every neighbourhood. They hold a monthly
teleconference to support women in getting started.
www.redtentmovie.com
www.sacredmoon.com.au
www.theredtent.net
ww.redtentdirectory.com
www.deannalam.com
www.pinterest.com/dreamingaloudnt/in-the-red-tent
Facebook community pages
The Happy Womb
Red Tent Movement
Red tents Moon lodges Red tent temples
Women’s Red Tents and Temples Worldwide
Things We Don’t Talk About: The Red Tent Movie
Red Tents in Every Neighbourhood
The Moon Woman
Occupy Menstruation
Journey of Young Women
Red tent videos online

[PDF page 147]

Lucy H. Pearce talking about red tents as part of DeAnna L’Am’s
Red Tent Summit 2014:
https://youtu.be/0ox5v5j8DXM
Lucy H. Pearce talking about empowering girls as part of DeAnna
L’Am’s Empowering Girls Summit 2015:
https://youtu.be/esT6KJc-w9w
Introduction to red tents and celebrating menarche:
http://youtube/1enWN7n8l3E
DeAnna L’am’s Red Tent in California:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQ39pZC6DRs
http://wn.com/The_Red_Tent
Books
Moon time
Red Moon: Understanding and using the creative sexual and
spiritual gifts of the menstrual cycle—Miranda Gray
The Optimized Woman—Miranda Gray
The Woman’s Quest—Unfolding Women’s Path of Power and
Wisdom—Alexandra Pope (from www.wildgenie.com)
The Wild Genie: The Healing Power of Menstruation—Alexandra
Pope
Thirteen Moons—Rachael Hertogs
The Wise Wound—Penelope Shuttle & Peter Redgrove
Alchemy for Women—Penelope Shuttle & Peter Redgrove
Cycle to the Moon: celebrating the menstrual trinity—Veronika
Sophia Robinson
Code Red: know your ﬂow, unlock your superpowers + create a
bloody amazing life. Period—Lisa Lister
Grandmother Moon: Lunar Magic In Our Lives—Spells, Rituals,
Goddesses, Legends and Emotions—Z. Budapest

[PDF page 148]

Her Blood is Gold: Celebrating the Power of Menstruation—Lara
Owen
Songs of Bleeding—Spider
Menarche
Reaching for the Moon: a girl’s guide to her female cycles (a
soulful guide for girls aged 9–14)—Lucy H. Pearce
Menarche: A Journey into Womanhood—Rachael Hertogs
Mother-Daughter Wisdom: Understanding the Crucial Links
Between Mothers, Daughters and Health—Dr Christiane Northrup
Celebrating Girls—Virginia Beane-Rutter
A Blessing not a Curse: A mother daughter guide to the transition
from child to woman—Jane Bennett
A Diva’s Guide to Getting Your First Period—DeAnna L’am with
gloriously creative and bright illustrations by Jessica Jarman-Hayes
The Thundering Years: Rituals and Sacred Wisdom for Teens—
Julie Tallard Johnson
Raising Girls— Steve Biddulph
The Seven Sacred Rites of Menarche—Kristi Meisenbach Boylan
Becoming Peers—DeAnna L’am
Becoming a Woman: A Guide for Girls Approaching Menstruation
—Jane Hardwicke Collings
Circle Round: Raising Children in Goddess Traditions—Starhawk,
Diane Baker, Anne Hill, Sara Ceres Boore
A Time To Celebrate: A Celebration of a Girl’s First Menstrual
Period—Joan Morais
For the text of a whole menarche book online:
www.moonandearthconnections.com/menstruationbooklets.htm
www.journeyofyoungwomen.org
www.deannalam.com
www.pinterest.com/dreamingaloudnt/empowering-girls

[PDF page 149]

Menopause and croning
The Wisdom of Menopause—Dr Christiane Northrup
Red Moon Passage—Bonnie Horrigan
The Change—Germaine Greer
Crone—Barbara Walker
Passage To Power: Natural Menopause Revolution—Leslie
Kenton
Crones Don’t Whine: Concentrated Wisdom for Juicy Women—
Jean Shinoda Bolen
New Menopausal Years: The Wise Woman Way—Alternative
Approaches for Women 30–90—Susun Weed
Natural Solutions to Menopause: How to stay healthy before,
during and beyond the menopause—Marilyn Glenville
Goddesses Never Age: The Secret Prescription for Radiance,
Vitality and Wellbeing—Dr Christiane Northrup
www.daisynetwork.org.uk
Sacred Menopause—Facebook Group
Miscarriage and stillbirth
uk-sands.org
Still Standing Magazine
www.talkbirth.com
Footprints on My Heart: a memoir of miscarriage and pregnancy
after loss—Molly Remer
Ritual, ceremony and celebration
www.ritualwell.org—for Jewish based rituals
www.paganwiccan.about.com—for Pagan and Earth based
ceremonies
www.blessingwaybook.com
www.pinterest.com/dreamingaloudnt/the-happy-womb
www.pinterest.com/dreamingaloudnt/blessingway

[PDF page 150]

Birthrites—Jackie Singer
For rites of passage ceremony for every part of the fertility journey.
Moon Rites—ritual, myth and magic for the modern moon goddess
—Spiraldancer
Mother Rising: the Blessingway Journey into Motherhood—
Cortlund, Lucke & Watelet
Mother Blessings: Honoring Women Becoming Mothers—Anna
Stewart
Blessingways: A Guide to Mother-Centered Baby Showers—Shari
Maser
The Blessingway: creating a beautiful blessingway ceremony—
Veronika Sophia Robinson
Body love and sex
Doodle your down there—a colouring book of genitals!
Cunt Loving Quest e-course—www.cherishthecunt.com
Woman is a River e-course—www.pixiecampbell.com
Read my Lips: A Complete Guide to the Vagina and Vulva—
Debbie Herbenick & Vanessa Schick
Wild Feminine—Tami Lynn Kent
Cunt—Inga de Muscio
Vagina: a new biography—Naomi Wolf
The Vagina Monologues—Eve Ensler
Bodies—Susie Orbach
Women who Love Sex—Gina Ogden
Women’s Anatomy of Arousal—Sherri Winston
The Hite Report—Shere Hite
The Sexual Practices of the Quodoshka—Amara Charles
Women’s herbals
Herbal Healing for Women—Rosemary Gladstar
Neal’s Yard Natural Remedies—Susan Curtis

[PDF page 151]

Holistic Women’s Herbal—K Campion
Wise Woman’s Herbal for the Childbearing Year—Susun Weed
Letting in the Wild Edges—Glennie Kindred
Women’s bodies, womb health and healing
The Uterine Health Companion—Dr. Eve Agee
Natural Solutions to PCOS: How to eliminate your symptoms and
boost your fertility—Marilyn Glenville
Period Repair Manual: Natural Treatment for Better Hormones and
Better Periods—Lara Briden
Women’s Bodies, Women’s Wisdom—Dr Christiane Northrup
Woman’s Health in Woman’s Hands—D. Cooper
The Hormone Cure—Dr Sara Gottfried
Yoni Shakti: a woman’s guide to power and freedom through yoga
and tantra—Uma Dinsmore Tuli
Hands on Health—Paula Youmell
You Can Heal Your Life—Louise. L. Hay
Woman Heal Thyself: an ancient healing system for contemporary
women—Jeanne Elizabeth Blumm
www.womentowomen.com
Contraception and fertility
The Pill: Are you sure it’s for you?—Jane Bennett and Alexandra
Pope
The Birth of the Pill: How Four Pioneers Reinvented Sex and
Launched a Revolution—Jonathan Eig
Sweetening the Pill: or How We Got Hooked on Hormonal Birth
Control—Holly Griggs Spall
Taking Charge of your Fertility—Toni Weschler
Conscious Conception—Jeannine Parvati Baker
Women’s wisdom—nourishing books that honour the feminine

[PDF page 152]

The Rainbow Way: cultivating creativity in the midst of motherhood
—Lucy H. Pearce
Moods of Motherhood: the inner journey of mothering—Lucy H.
Pearce
Succulent Wild Woman: dancing with your wonder-full self—SARK
The Woman’s Comfort Book—Jennifer Louden
The Woman’s Retreat Book—Jennifer Louden
Shakti Woman: Feeling Our Fire, Healing Our World—The New
Female Shamanism—Vicki Noble
Embodying the Feminine—Chameli Ardagh
Body of Wisdom—Hilary Hart
Maps to Ecstasy: The Healing Power of Movement—Gabrielle
Roth
Circle of Stones—Judith Duerk
Women Who Run with the Wolves—Clarissa Pinkola Estes
Untie the Strong Woman—Clarissa Pinkola Estes
Ix Chel Wisdom—Shonagh Home
Keys to the Open Gate: A Woman’s Spirituality Sourcebook—
Kimberley Snow
Womanrunes—Molly Remer
She Walks in Beauty—A Woman’s Journey Through Poems—
selected by Caroline Kennedy
Journey to the Dark Goddess—Jane Meredith
Kissing the Hag: the dark goddess and the unacceptable nature of
women
Jaguar Woman—Lynn V. Andrews
The Heart of the Labyrinth—Nicole Schwab
Red Hot and Holy—Sera Beak
The Woman in the Body—Emily Martin

[PDF page 153]

Herstory—Free e-book of women’s history available from
www.moonsong.com.au

[PDF page 154]

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Lucy H. Pearce is a passionate teacher and writer on the topic of
womancraft—the art and craft of being a woman that your mother never
taught you.
The mother of three home-birthed children, now aged nine, seven
and ﬁve, she lives in a little pink house with white shutters, in the village
of her birth on the coast in County Cork, Ireland
Together with her husband, she runs a publishing imprint,
Womancraft Publishing, creating life-changing, paradigm-shifting
books by women, for women. They are champions of new technology,
building strong collaborative, creative partnerships, human-friendly
working practices and fair proﬁt sharing. They oﬀer editorial and
mentoring services through their company Lucent Word.
A former contributing editor at Juno magazine, Lucy wrote her
popular column, Dreaming Aloud for the magazine, for almost
ﬁve years.
She blogs at Dreaming Aloud.net, where she muses on creativity,
motherhood, mindfulness and living philosophy.
Her website, The Happy Womb.com is a repository of empowering
resources for women.
Lucy is the author of ﬁve books. Her work has received great
acclaim from her own creative heroines, as well as women around the
world. Her guest posts have been featured on Rhythm of the Home,
Tiny Buddha, Wild Sister, The Big Lunch and TreeSisters.
Lucy has also become known for her vibrant visual art, particularly
her lost archetypes of the feminine series. Her work has been
commissioned for magazines, book covers and family portraits.
lucy-h-pearce.artistwebsites.com
You can contact her by email at: lucy@thehappywomb.com

[PDF page 155]

WOMANCRAFT PUBLISHING
Life-changing, paradigm-shifting books
by women, for women.
 
 
Visit us at: www.womancraftpublishing.com
Where you can sign up to the mailing list and receive samples of
our forthcoming titles before anyone else.
 
 Womancraft Publishing
 WomancraftBooks
 Womancraft Publishing
 
Please do leave a review of this book on your favourite retailer.

[PDF page 156]

Also from Womancraft
Burning Woman
by Lucy H. Pearce (April 2016)
The long-awaited new title from Amazon bestselling author Lucy H.
Pearce. Burning Woman is a breath-taking and controversial woman’s
journey through history — personal and cultural — on a quest to ﬁnd
and free her own power.
Uncompromising and all-encompassing, Pearce uncovers the
archetype of the Burning Women of days gone by — Joan of Arc and
the witch trials, through to the way women are burned today in cyber
bullying, acid attacks, shaming and burnout, fearlessly examining the
roots of Feminine power —what it is, how it has been controlled, and
why it needs to be unleashed on the world during our modern Burning
Times.
With contributions from leading burning women of our era: Isabel
Abbott, ALisa Starkweather, Shiloh Sophia McCloud, Molly Remer,
Julie Daley, Bethany Webster ...
A must-read for all women! A life-changing book that ﬁlls the
reader with a burning passion and desire for change.
Glennie Kindred, author of Earth Wisdom
 
 
Moon Dreams 2017 Diary
by Starr Meneely
(September 2016)
Nurturing mindfulness, reﬂectiveness and awareness of our body,
feelings, menstrual cycle, and the cycle of the moon, Moon Dreams is a
simple yet powerful tool in the form of a beautifully illustrated week-on-
two-page diary.
o 52-week diary

[PDF page 157]

o Space to doodle
o Beautiful illustrations to colour
o Information on charting your cycle
o Learn about the moon’s phases and how they aﬀect you
o Quotations to inspire and uplift
o Private space to reﬂect
This journal will set young women on a path of mindfulness, self-love
and connection with the wild, beautiful, natural world around them.
Moon Dreams has the potential to be life changing; it reclaims our
menstrual cycle as a sacred, powerful experience, rather than the
revolting weakness that modern society seems to view it as. Every
woman needs to get her hands on a Moon Dreams journal!
Lucy AitkenRead, Lulastic and the Hippyshake
Reaching for the Moon: a girl’s guide to her cycles
by Lucy H. Pearce
(2d ed. October 2015)
The girls’ version of Lucy H. Pearce’s Amazon bestselling book
Moon Time. For girls aged 9-14, as they anticipate and experience their
body’s changes. Reaching for the Moon is a nurturing celebration of a
girl’s transformation to womanhood.
Beginning with an imaginary journey into the red tent, a traditional
place of women’s wisdom, gifts and secrets of womanhood are
imparted in a gentle lyrical way. along with practical advice.
Now also available in the following translations:
Reiken naar de Maan (Dutch)
Rejoindre la Lune (French)
W Rytmie Księżyca (Polish)
A message of wonder, empowerment, magic and beauty in the
shared secrets of our femininity ...written to encourage girls to embrace

[PDF page 158]

their transition to womanhood in a knowledgeable, supported, loving
way.
thelovingparent.com
 
The Other Side of the River: Stories of Women, Water and the
World,
by Eila Kundrie Carrico (January 2016)
A deep searching into the ways we become dammed and how we
recover ﬂuidity. It is a journey through memory and time, personal and
shared landscapes to discover the source, the ﬂow and the deltas of
women and water.
Rooted in rivers, inspired by wetlands, sources and tributaries, this
book weaves its path between the banks of memory and story, from
Florida to Kyoto, storm-ravaged New Orleans to London, via San
Francisco and Ghana. We navigate through ﬂood and drought to
confront the place of wildness in the age of technology.
Part memoir, part manifesto, part travelogue and part love letter to
myth and ecology, The Other Side of the River is an intricately woven
tale of ﬁnding your ﬂow ...and your roots.
An instant classic for the new paradigm.
Lucia Chiavola Birnbaum, award-winning author
and Professor Emeritus
 
 
The Heroines Club: A Mother-Daughter Empowerment Circle,
by Melia Keeton-Digby (April 2016)
Nourishing guidance and a creative approach for mothers and
daughters, aged 7+, to learn and grow together through the study of
women’s history. Each month focuses on a diﬀerent heroine, featuring
athletes, inventors, artists, and revolutionaries from around the world—

[PDF page 159]

including Frida Kahlo, Rosalind Franklin, Amelia Earhart, Anne Frank,
Maya Angelou and Malala Yousafzai as strong role models for young
girls to learn about, look up to, and be inspired by.
The Heroines Club is truly a must-have book for mothers who wish
to foster a deeper connection with their daughters. As mothers, we are
our daughter’s ﬁrst teacher, role model, and wise counsel. This book
should be in every woman’s hands, and passed down from generation
to generation.
Wendy Cook, founder and facilitator of Mighty Girl Art
 
 
Liberating Motherhood:
Birthing the Purplestockings Movement
by Vanessa Olorenshaw
(September 2016)
If it is true that there have been waves of feminism, then mothers’
rights are the ﬂotsam left behind on the ocean surface of patriarchy.
Mothers are in bondage – and not in a 50 Shades way.
Liberating Motherhood
discusses our bodies, our minds, our labour and our hearts,
exploring issues from birth and breastfeeding to mental health,
economics, politics, basic incomes and love and in doing so, broaches
a conversation we’ve been avoiding for years: how do we value
motherhood?
Highly acclaimed by leading parenting authors, academics and
activists, with a foreword by Naomi Stadlen, founder of Mothers Talking
and author of What Mothers Do, and How Mothers Love.
Lucid and riveting... This is The Female Eunuch of the 21st
century.

[PDF page 160]

Steve Biddulph, bestselling author of Raising Boys, Raising Girls,
and The Secret of Happy Children
Liberating Motherhood is an important contribution to a vital
debate of our times. Vanessa Olorenshaw speaks with warmth, wit and
clarity, representing lives and voices unheard for too long.
Shami Chakrabarti, author of On Liberty, former director of Liberty
and formerly ‘the most dangerous woman in Britain’
The Heart of the Labyrinth
by Nicole Schwab
(November 2014)
Reminiscent of Paulo Coelho’s masterpiece The Alchemist and
Lynn V. Andrew’s acclaimed Medicine Woman series, The Heart of the
Labyrinth is a beautifully evocative spiritual parable, ﬁlled with exotic
landscapes and transformational soul lessons.
As everything she thought she knew about herself disintegrates:
her health, career, family and identity, Maya embarks on a journey of
discovery to the land of her ancestors. Coming face-to-face with her
subconscious belief that being a woman is a threat, she understands
that to step into wholeness she will have to reclaim the sacred feminine
ﬁre burning in her soul.
Once in a while, a book comes along that kindles the ﬁre of our
inner wisdom so profoundly, the words seem to leap oﬀ the page and
go straight into our heart. If you read only one book this year, this is it.
Dean Ornish, M.D, President, Preventive Medicine Research
Institute, Author of The Spectrum
Moods of Motherhood: the inner journey of mothering,
by Lucy H. Pearce
(2nd ed. November 2014)
Moods of Motherhood charts the inner journey of motherhood,
giving voice to the often nebulous, unspoken tumble of emotions that

[PDF page 161]

motherhood evokes: tenderness, frustration, joy, grief, anger,
depression and love. Lucy H. Pearce explores the taboo subjects of
maternal ambiguity, competitiveness, and the quest for perfection,
oﬀering support, acceptance, and hope to mothers everywhere.
Though the story is hers, it could be yours.
This fully-updated second edition features 23 new pieces including
posts written for her popular blog, Dreaming Aloud, her best-loved
magazine columns and articles, and many other original pieces. This is
a book full of Lucy’s trademark searing honesty and raw emotions,
which have brought a global following of mothers to her work.
Lucy’s frank and forthright style paired with beautiful, haunting
language and her talent for storytelling will have any parent nodding,
crying and laughing along – appreciating the good and the bad, the
hard and the soft, the light and the dark. A must-read for any new
parent.
Zoe Foster, JUNO magazine
Upcoming
Dirty & Divine:
a transformative journey through tarot
by Alice Grist (March 2017)
Dirty & Divine is a tarot-led vision quest to reclaiming your
femininity in all its lucid and colourful depths.
In Dirty & Divine Alice takes us on an adventure through the
magical world of tarot cards. Divination comes from the Latin verb
‘divinare’ and literally means ‘being inspired by a god’. Therefore you
could say that using tarot cards is one means of putting images and
words to the voices of Divine beings (or cosmic forces if you like) that
oﬀer a higher perspective on human life on Earth! As always Grist is
brave, funny and honest! You are in very good hands on this Journey

[PDF page 162]

into Mystery and you will discover the down-to-earth everyday beneﬁts
of tarot cards. I say: treat yourself to this adventure!
Imelda Almqvist, author of Natural Born Shaman:
A Spiritual Toolkit for life
The Goddess in You
by Patricia Lemos and Ana Alonso (April 2017)
Especially created for girls aged 9-14 years, oﬀering a unique,
interactive approach to establishing cycle awareness, positive health
and well-being. The Goddess in You contains thirteen beautifully
designed cycle mandalas, each illustrated with a goddess from Greek
mythology.
o 13 double-sided cycle mandalas illustrated with goddesses
o Instructions for use
o An introduction to the 13 featured Greek goddesses
o A basic, age-appropriate introduction to the menstrual cycle
o Self-care tips for health and well-being

[PDF page 163]



[PDF page 164]



[PDF page 165]



[PDF page 166]



[PDF page 167]



[PDF page 168]



[PDF page 169]



[PDF page 170]

