

[PDF page 1]

DR SARAH MCKAY 


[PDF page 2]

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/womensbrainbookn0O000mcka 


[PDF page 3]



[PDF page 4]

a a 7 — 


[PDF page 5]

THE 
ea eH 
‘eine aS i serene Ua BE Gas 
x. had i) , =F aia Be 
Be orecsaanttetl Brett? SS etn io Plenary tiaecrn sy Tani 
THE NEUROSCIENCE OF 
HEALTH, HORMONES 
AND HAPPINESS 
H hachette AUSTRALIA 
Wisaa ei Sae. ectotiy sea 


[PDF page 6]

IMPORTANT NOTE TO READERS: Although every effort has been made to ensure that 
the contents of this book are accurate, it must not be treated as a substitute for medical 
consultation. Always consult a qualified medical practitioner. Neither the author nor the 
publisher can be held responsible for any loss or claim arising out of the use, or misuse, 
of the suggestions made or the failure to take advice. 
é] hachette AUSTRALIA 
Published in Australia and New Zealand in 2018 
by Hachette Australia 
(an imprint of Hachette Australia Pty Limited) 
Level 17, 207 Kent Street, Sydney NSW 2000 
www.hachette.com.au 
Copyright © Sarah McKay 2018 
This book is copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of private study, 
research, criticism or review permitted under the Copyright Act 1968, no part may be 
stored or reproduced by any process without prior written permission. Enquiries should 
be made to the publisher. 
A catalogue record for this 
NATIONAL book is available from the 
LIBRARY National Library of Australia OW AUSTRALIA 
978 0 7336 3852 7 (pbk.) 
Cover design by Christabella Designs 
Cover photograph courtesy of Shutterstock 
Author photo courtesy of Bayleigh Vedelago 
Typeset in Garamond Regular by Kirby Jones 
Printed and bound in Australia by McPherson's Printing Group 
The paper this book is printed on is certified against the 
MIX Forest Stewardship Council® Standards. McPherson‘s 
teenie coms Printing Group holds FSC® chain of custody certification 
SA-COC-005379. FSC® promotes environmentally 
responsible, socially beneficial and economically viable 
management of the world’s forests. 
oe FSC* C001695 


[PDF page 7]

Contents 
Introduction 
On being the owner and operator of a woman’s brain 
Where is all the women’s health neuroscience research? 
How different are the differences between male 
and female brains? 
Nature, nurture or neuroplasticity? 
Your plastic mosaic brain 
A disclaimer 
1. In Utero 
The Great Sperm Race 
implanting the egg 
The case of the neural tube is not yet closed 
You were destined to be female 
Ovaries develop in the absence of the Y male chromosome 
Sex hormones organise reproductive regions of the prenatal brain 
What is the role of oestrogen in female brain development? 
Joining the dots from brain to behaviour 
How to build a brain 
The birth of new brain cells 
Zika virus disrupts brain cell migration 
Half of all neurons are born to die 
Molecules guide axons to their targets 
Synapses are miniature zones of communication 
Use it or lose it 
The first 1000 days of brain development 
Worrying about worry 
The Montreal Ice Storm Study 
A newborn brain is a rough draft ready for editing 


[PDF page 8]

2. Childhood 
Brain development from birth to adulthood 
Taking a closer look at white and grey matter 
Brain architecture is built by early experiences 
Young brains are plastic brains 
Opening and closing sensitive periods 
Language acquisition in children — from universalist to specialist 
Deprivation during the first year — a critical period for language 
Toxic stress in childhood leaves lasting effects on the brain 
Another ‘natural experiment’ — the Christchurch earthquakes 
Are resilient children born or made? 
Experiences of gender 
Boys and girls go out to play 
Hormones and the ‘mini puberty’ of infancy 
Gender stereotypes begin before birth 
Why do expectations of gender matter? 
What do growing brains need to thrive? 
3. Puberty 
First puberty 
The HPO axis — how the brain and body talk puberty 
Awakening the biological clock 
Awakening the clock with a genetic KISS 
Is puberty starting at younger ages? 
What are the causes of early-but-normal puberty? 
Mood changes at puberty 
Normal moods or a mental health problem? 
How does puberty shape the brain? 
4. The Menstrual Cycle 
Our personal monthly neuroscience experiment 
Attitudes to menstruation matter 
The neural control of menstruation 
How do hormones get inside the brain? 
Imaging the effects of hormones on the brain 
vi 


[PDF page 9]

Does the menstrual cycle change how we feel? 
Does the menstrual cycle change how we think? 
PMS, mood and the menstrual cycle 
Is PMS a modern-day myth? 
Premenstrual Dysmorphic Disorder 
Does the pill cause depression? 
What happens to your brain on the pill? 
5. The Teenage Brain 
Halfway between girlhood and womanhood 
The stereotype of the teenage brain is wrong 
The teenage brain is still undergoing development 
Grey matter thins as connections are refined 
More white matter enables faster communication 
Subdcortical brain areas shrink and grow 
The social brain develops during adolescence 
Teenage brains join .a new tribe 
The painful consequences of being left out 
Why does rejection hurt so badly? 
The ‘emotional adolescent’ is developmentally normal 
Learning to regulate emotions 
Is mental illness emotional development gone wrong? 
Risk-taking and the mismatch between thinking and feeling 
Do girls take risks? 
The imaginary audience — who js watching me’? 
Adolescence is a unique window of opportunity for education 
6. Depression and Anxiety 
Why is there a gender gap in depression and anxiety? 
Depression — the basics 
Anxiety — the basics 
Enduring mental wellbeing is rare 
What does a depressed brain look like? 
Do depressed brains work differently from healthy brains? 
Is depression caused by a chemical imbalance in the brain? 
vii 
89 
90 
93 
94 
98 
99 
102 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
114 
114 
112 
112 
113 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
125 
127 
128 
129 
130 
133 
135 
136 


[PDF page 10]

Is there a gene for depression? 
Is the depression gender gap due to sex hormones? 
Oestrogen may improve mood 
Progesterone may exacerbate anxiety and PTSD 
The inner mean girl 
Depression is a stress-related disorder 
How does a stressful event get under our skin? 
The neurobiology of stress 
Is depression due to inflammation? 
Stress and gender issues 
You’re depressed or anxious — now what? 
Not all treatments work for all people all of the time 
7. Sex, Love and Neurobiology 
Adolescence is a sensitive period for learning about sex 
The alchemy of attraction 
How hormones influence mate choice and sex drive 
Feeling frisky on oestrogen 
Let’s talk about sexual response cycles 
Turning on the ‘ONs’ and turning off the ‘OFFs’ 
Where are the brain’s ON and OFF switches? 
Can drugs be used to hit the sexual accelerator or brake? 
Testosterone — does it really boost libido in women? 
Mating in captivity - are you just bored? 
Sexual orientation and the brain 
The neurobiology of orgasms 
This is her brain during orgasm 
The neurobiology of multiple orgasms 
Are female orgasms just a happy accident? 
Can we become addicted to love? 
Oxytocin — one molecule to love and bond us all? 
Oxytocin — what we've learned from the monogamous prairie vole 
Social support buffers stress because of oxytocin 
Is oxytocin the new love potion? 
viii 
139 
141 
141 
142 
146 
147 
147 
148 
150 
152 
153 
153 
155 
156 
157 
159 
160 
161 
163 
164 
165 
166 
168 
169 
WA 
173 
175 
176 
as 
178 
179 
181 
182 


[PDF page 11]

8. Pregnancy and Motherhood 
Pregnancy leads to long-lasting changes in women’s brains 
The expectant rodent brain 
Your expectant brain and hormones of pregnancy 
Prolactin — the quintessential hormone of pregnancy 
and parenting 
Prolactin, hunger and resisting the urge to eat for two 
Pregnant women are less reactive to stress 
Is ‘baby brain’ a myth? 
Are labour pains needed for brain gains? 
This is why babies cry 
This is your brain on breastfeeding 
Breastfeeding and the neural control of fertility 
Depression and motherhood 
The baby blues 
Depression and the myths of motherhood 
Once a mother, always a mother 
9. Menopause 
A quick guide to the stages of menopause 
Why do we go through menopause? 
Are your menopause symptoms all in your head? 
This is your brain on hot flashes 
Hormones warm us up and cool us down 
This is your brain on disrupted sleep 
A quick guide to the neurobiology of sleep 
Sex differences in sleep 
Which comes first - hormones, hot flashes or sleep problems? 
This is your brain on the menopausal blues 
This is your brain on ‘brain fog’ 
Is it ‘brain fog’ or dementia? 
Will you ‘suffer’ or ‘sail’ through menopause? 
Hormone therapy for menopause 
A quick history of HRT 
185 
186 
190 
192 
194 
195 
197 
199 
204 
206 
208 
214 
212 
213 
214 
215 
217 
219 
221 
222 
223 
225 
226 
220 
228 
231 
232 
233 
235 
236 
238 
238 


[PDF page 12]

Fear, loathing and women’s health studies 
Weighing up the risks and benefits of HRT 
Does HRT cause or prevent dementia? 
Mind the gap of midlife 
10. The Ageing Brain 
Uncovering the secrets of exceptional longevity 
Are the exceptionally old also exceptionally happy and healthy? 
Predicting who will reach 100 
Why do women live longer than men? 
The influence of biological sex on the lifespan 
The influence of reproductive history on the lifespan 
Is dementia a women’s brain health problem? 
Dementia —- humanity’s brain health problem 
What is dementia? How does it differ from Alzheimer’s disease? 
Memory loss with ageing is normal 
Stuck in the moment with dementia 
Taking a closer look at the ageing brain 
Proof of principle — using lifestyle change to slow disease 
How to nurture a healthy brain for life 
The best exercise for your brain is physical exercise 
What type of physical exercise is best? 
Eat real food, not too much, mostly plants 
Get more sleep 
Challenge your mind 
Find your place or moment of calm 
Connect with family and friends 
Seek out meaning and purpose 
Is it ever too late to hope for change? 
Acknowledgements 
Notes 
240 
243 
246 
248 
249 
251 
255 
207 
260 
262 
263 
266 
267 
269 
270 
etl 
273 
275 
278 
fi ¢S) 
279 
279 
281 
281 
282 
283 
283 
284 
287 
289 


[PDF page 13]

Introduction 
On being the owner and operator 
of a woman’s brain 
‘Can you write an article on why women feel like they’re losing 
their minds during menopause?’ asked the editor of a brain 
health website I was writing for a few years ago. ‘You’re our 
neuroscience writer, see what you can find out.” My brief was 
straightforward: Write about the menopausal symptom ‘brain 
fog’ and its causes. When I set out to answer the question I 
tather naively assumed the answer would be simple — slow and 
hazy thinking, difficulty focusing, and forgetfulness (the more 
formal definitions of ‘brain fog’) could be blamed on ageing 
ovaties and waning hormones. 
Digging into the research and speaking to women’s health 
experts, I learned that it wasn’t as simple as blaming brain fog on 
declining ovarian hormones. Levels of many hormones certainly 
do change with age and hormones impact how the brain works. 
However, each woman’s individual experience of menopausal 
brain-related symptoms depends on multiple interacting causes 
such as her general level of health and wellbeing, genetic makeup, 
previous expetience of depression, how much sleep or exercise 


[PDF page 14]

rs THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
she’s getting, relationships and support networks, reproductive 
history and other life events. 
I also discovered ‘brain fog’ differs from what doctors call 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), which is a symptom of 
unhealthy brain ageing. Similarities between brain fog and MCI 
can cause considerable angst as many women mistakenly assume 
their fogginess indicates the beginning of the descent towards 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD). 
My wander into the world of women’s brain health got me 
thinking about so-called ‘baby brain’, a term rather like “brain 
fog’ that some of my friends use to describe pregnancy-induced 
fuzzy thinking and an inability to concentrate. What are the 
causes of ‘baby brain’, I wondered? Could we lay the blame 
solely on pregnancy hormones? Was it due to anxiety around 
giving birthe Or was a kicking baby merely a distraction? 
My musings over ‘baby brain’ and ‘brain fog’ and their causes 
triggered a cascade of questions about womanhood, nature, 
nurture and neurobiology that I’d never before considered. 
Was postnatal depression due to plummeting hormones after 
giving birth, lack of sleep, or loss of identity as a career woman? 
What about puberty blues? Was the emotional turmoil of 
adolescence due to the menstrual cycle? Or starting high school? 
Or mean girlsr 
What happens to our brains during the menstrual cycle? 
What impact does the pill have on our emotions? Is hormone 
replacement therapy (HRT) good or bad? Does motherhood 
change our brains? What happens to our brains when we fall in 
lover 
I realised V’d spent forty-odd years as the owner and 
operator of a woman’s body and brain, and over half of those 
years working as a neuroscientist, but I'd given close to zero 
consideration to how my neurobiology was sculpted by my life 


[PDF page 15]

INTRODUCTION 3 
as a gitl and woman, and indeed how my female brain influenced 
my everyday life and experiences. 
And so, the idea for this book was born. 
My goal is to take you on a chronological tour across the lifespan 
to explore how our minds and brains ate shaped and sculpted 
by our genes and hormones, our life experiences, society and 
culture, and our thoughts, feelings and beliefs. The story begins 
in the womb and chapters focus in turn on infancy and girlhood, 
puberty and the menstrual cycle, the teenage years, mental health, 
romance and sex, pregnancy and motherhood, menopause, and 
finally longevity and old age. My focus is unashamedly on the 
female lifespan, but naturally, many of the themes explored apply 
equally to males and females, including in utero life, child and 
adolescent development, mental health, love and ageing. 
Where is all the women’s health 
neuroscience research? 
Over the last decade writing about brain science, I’ve developed 
a tried and tested method for researching an unfamiliar topic. 
First, Pll read the appropriate chapter in Principles of Neural 
Science, the neuro-bible beloved by brain geeks the world over. 
Then Pll run a quick search on PubMed, an online search 
engine of biomedical literature, to find a recent review of 
the topic, typically written by a top scientist in the particular 
field, which will give me a feel for the topic’s controversies 
and consensus. Then [ll feel confident enough to read and 
understand original research papers. Finally, Pll seek out the 
experts themselves — the scientists, doctors and specialists 
who, despite their busy schedules, usually give generously of 
their time to answer my questions and fill in the gaps of my 
knowledge. 


[PDF page 16]

4 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
However, describing the neurobiology of women’s everyday 
lives hasn’t always been as straightforward as 1 expected when I 
began. My meander through the world of women’s health often 
left me bewildered. Time and time again I’d open the textbooks 
ot scan the literature to find scant research on some of the 
questions [’d been most curious about. 
For example, I assumed the literature would be replete with 
information on how the oral contraceptive pill affects women’s 
brains. A 2014 review summed up the current state of affairs 
with the title 50 Years of Hormonal Contraception: Time to Find Out 
What It Does to the Brain. Quite. 
I proudly announced to Facebook the day I finally dived into 
the neurobiology of multiple orgasms. But it was not a deep dive. 
PubMed spat out only five literature reviews, three of which were 
devoted to the possibility of multiple orgasms in men. One was 
amusingly titled Multiple Orgasms in Men: What We Know So Far. 
(FYI: Orgasms don’t rate a mention in neuroscience textbooks 
and we don’t know much so far about women’s orgasms either.) 
Despite my best efforts, I was unable to pin down the 
statistics for how many women suffer emotional turmoil in 
the days leading up to their period, aka premenstrual syndrome 
(PMS). I eventually narrowed the range down to somewhere 
between twelve per cent and ninety per cent. 
I was positive I'd be able to tell my mid-life readers whether 
or not HRT would help protect against dementia or clear away 
their brain fog. We simply don’t have enough information about 
the benefits to brain health for any recommendations to be 
made. Why is the HRT literature so sparse when it comes to 
neurobiology and women’s health 
There are a number of reasons. 
Historically, preclinical research (research conducted on 
lab animals such as tats, mice ot monkeys) has mostly been 


[PDF page 17]

INTRODUCTION 5 
conducted on male animals. A 2009 survey of over 2000 
animal studies found a significant male bias in eight out of ten 
biological disciplines. The bias was most pronounced in the 
field of neuroscience, where five and a half males were studied 
for every one female. Worryingly, pharmacology (the study of 
drugs) shares similar statistics, with five males studied to every 
one female. 
Clinical research (investigations conducted on humans) hasn’t 
fared much better. There are a few large, all-female projects such 
as the Women’s Health Study which Pll discuss in later chapters, 
but for many years women were excluded from clinical studies 
and drug trials altogether. As one critic notes, ‘Many medical 
professionals can attest to the fact that for decades, the default 
human model subject was a 70-kg male.’ 
This is alarming, because diagnoses for anxiety and depression 
are more than twice as common in women than in men, women 
have more strokes than men, twice as many women suffer from 
multiple sclerosis, and women have a higher susceptibility to 
adverse drug reactions compared with men. Indeed, between 
1997 and 2000, eight out of ten drugs withdrawn from the 
US market were removed due to more severe adverse effects 
in women. The cumulative effect of excluding women from 
teseatch studies, or assuming that biologically women are ‘little 
men’, is destructive.» * As has been pointed out in the journal 
Nature, medical cate as it is currently applied to women 1s less 
evidence-based or ‘robust’ than that applied to men. 
You'd be tempted to believe that straightforward sexism 
permeates the hallowed halls and ivory towers as readily as 
other global institutions. It does, but sexism isn’t the only reason 
for lack of gender equality. There are some legitimate reasons 
to skew the ratios. One teason is safety, because if women fall 
pregnant during a drug trial there is the potential for harming the 


[PDF page 18]

6 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
unborn baby. Another reason is that females — both animals and 
humans — complicate data gathering. Our cyclical reproductive 
hormones, especially during the fertile years between puberty 
and menopause, make our biology intrinsically more fickle than 
males. The menstrual cycle was once likened to ‘a pesky sort 
of feature essentially of the female, an unnecessary source of 
additional variability and one wisest to avoid’.’ 
To further complicate matters, 1n humans biological sex 
(anatomy and physiology) and gender (characteristics that 
a society ot culture defines as masculine or feminine) are 
tightly entwined and hard to tease apart. As you'll learn, it’s 
extraordinarily difficult to make statements such as, ‘It’s due 
to her hormones’, or ‘It’s all to do with cultural expectations.’ 
Rather than tackle the intricacies of female sex and gender, 
female hormones and culture, researchers often choose the 
easier route of focusing on males. 
Finally, research on sex and gender was for a long time almost 
taboo. This was especially so in the neurosciences where many 
researchers were deeply concerned that their findings could be 
hyacked to support outdated and inaccurate stereotypes and 
discrimination. The fears were not unfounded. Women’s brains 
have historically been found wanting or biologically inferior 
compared to men’s, and such research has been co-opted 
to ‘keep women in their place’.° One neuroscientist pointed 
out that exploring sex differences was once ‘a terrific way for 
a brain scientist not studying reproductive functions to lose 
credibility at best and, at worst, become a pariah in the eyes of 
the neuroscience mainstream’.’ I spoke to another who said she 
once believed including sex as a biological variable was ‘lazy’. 
This was before she came to the conclusion that studying the 
impact of a woman’s menstrual cycle on the brain might add a 
valuable dimension to her research. 


[PDF page 19]

INTRODUCTION 7 
Fortunately, the research community is taking steps to address 
the dearth of neurobiological research in women, and in this 
book you’ll meet some of the researchers at the forefront of the 
movement. Institutions such as the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) in the United States and academic publications such as 
the Journal of Neuroscience Research now mandate the inclusion of 
sex as a biological variable in all research. The World Health 
Organization (WHO) clearly states that research into health of 
women and girls is a particular priority. Here in Australia, we 
have the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health, a 
sutvey of the physical, mental and psychosocial health of over 
580060 women across their lifespan. Finally, there are some 
fabulous reseatch initiatives such as Stanford University’s 
Gendered Innovations project that exist to ‘harness the creative 
powet of sex and gender analysis for innovation and discovery’. 
How different are the differences 
between male and female brains? 
Tell people you’re writing a book about the neurobiology of 
women’s everyday lives and you're inevitably asked the question, 
‘What are the differences between male and female brains?” 
People are quick to rattle off long list of attributes they believe 
ate due to innate biological differences in the brains of men and 
women. We love the idea that all women have ‘female brains’, and 
all men possess ‘male brains’, and that in turn our brains govern 
our ‘feminine’ or ‘masculine’ behaviours, aptitudes, preferences 
and personality. You'll be familiar with some of these ideas. 
Because of their ‘female brains’ women ate emotional, can’t 
read maps but can multitask, prefer people to things, don’t ask 
for promotions, and certainly aren’t cut out for computer coding 
ot STEM careers. 


[PDF page 20]

8 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Because of their ‘male brains’ men can’t read emotions, prefer 
things to people (except when it comes to porn), are more likely to 
be geniuses, and aggressively seek higher status in the workplace. 
Clearly, we’re captivated by findings of sex and gender 
differences, especially when they’re accompanied by a brain- 
based explanation. (Really, what could make a more seductive 
newspapet headline than a combination of sex and neurosciencer) 
My answer to the sex difference question always begins with 
me stating that “his is not a book. about the differences between male and 
female brains. Vhis book unashamedly explores girls’ and women’s 
health through the lens of neurobiology. j 
I then like to explain that there is no such thing as a ‘male brain’ 
ot a ‘female brain’. In fact, male and female brains are much more 
similar than they are different. We simply cannot sort people into 
two distinct groups based on their brain anatomy in the same way 
we can sensibly sort people into two groups based on the anatomy 
of their genitals. Instead, each of our brains are unique mosaics of 
different features, some male-like, some female-like, with plenty 
of features best described as androgynous. 
The concept of a mosaic brain has recetved support 
from a group working at Tel Aviv University in Israel led by 
neurobiologist Daphna Joel. Her team used a type of brain- 
scanning technique called magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
to make hundreds of measurements of the brains of over 
1400 adults. Joel’s team found there was extensive overlap of 
the distributions of women and men for all brain regions and 
connections measured. Some brain features were more common 
in females compared with males, some more common in males 
compared with females, and up to half of the 1400 brains 
contained features common in both.’ 
Forgive the stereotypical colour selection, but think of it like 
this: our brains are assembled of many hundreds of little parts 


[PDF page 21]

INTRODUCTION 9 
that are coloured pink if they are female-like and blue if they 
are male-like. Viewed from a distance, some women have brain 
mosaics that ate strongly pink-tinged, others in men appear 
to be the bluest of blues, but most of us have brain mosaics 
coloured various shades of indigo, purple and mauve. 
Another way to think about our brains is rather similarly 
to how we think about many of our habits, likes and dislikes, 
abilities and personality quirks: a mix of so-called ‘masculine’ or 
‘feminine’ and gender-neutral characteristics. Each one of us is 
a unique mosaic and so is our brain. 
There is a neat statistic that enables us to clearly assess the 
size of any sex difference. Now I’m very aware that for many 
of you, statistics may be dry and hard to conceptualise. Luckily 
neurobiologist Donna Maney has developed a nifty online tool 
you can use to give a clear illustration of the data. If you’re so 
inclined, you can find it at SexDifference.org. 
For the statistically minded, the tool generates a d value, which 
is a measure of the size of the difference between two groups. 
Here is the important part: if there is no sex difference, the 
d value is zero. As the size of the sex difference increases, 
the d value gets bigger. As a rule, a d value of up to 0.20 1s 
considered a small sex difference, 0.50 is a moderate difference, 
and over 0.80 is a large difference. 
Let’s consider three examples of sex differences so you get 
the idea: adult height, connectivity between the left and right 
hemispheres of the brain, and maths scores at Year 3. 
If I told you one of my parents was 191 centimetres tall and 
the other was 160 centimetres tall, you'd correctly guess the taller 
was my dad. There’s no argument that the average man is taller 
than the average woman. However, we all know some women ate 
taller than some men. So, if I told you I had a sibling who was 
183 centimetres tall, you might guess I had a brother, when in 


[PDF page 22]

10 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
fact I have a very tall sister. The large sex difference in average 
heights is reflected in a big d value of 1.91. Even so, there is still 
considerable overlap (about thirty-four per cent) between height 
distributions of men and women. 
One popular claim is that women’s left and right hemispheres 
are ‘more connected’ than men’s hemispheres because we have 
a bigger corpus callosum (the fibre bundle that bridges the 
two sides of the brain). For some reason, this has been taken 
to mean women excel at multitasking and expressing empathy. 
In Figure 1, you'll see there is a difference in the average 
connectivity between males and females, but it’s small. The 
d value is 0.31 with eighty-eight per cent overlap. 
Another notion is that boys are better at maths than girls 
(apparently this explains why there aren’t many female software 
engineers working for Google). To test this claim I put the scores 
from the 2016 Year 3 NAPLAN numeracy test (an Australia-wide 
standardised test*), which is the year my oldest son completed the 
exams, into Maney’s SexDifference.org calculator. For my son’s 
cohort, the boys’ average maths score was ever so slightly higher 
than the girls’ average score. But the d value was 0.14, meaning 
the difference was trivial, and the overlap between distributions 
was ninety-four per cent. In other words, nearly half the girls 
scored higher marks than the average boy. 
Gio, a 
— “- 
Height, d= 1.91 Connectivity, d = 0.31 Numeracy, d = 0.14 
Figure 1. Distribution curves for sex differences in adult height, left-right brain hemisphere 
connectivity and numeracy. Solid line = females. Dashed line = males. Adapted from 
sexdifference.org 


[PDF page 23]

INTRODUCTION 11 
The idea behind these statistics is not to bore you to teats but to 
give you a practical way to assess reported sex differences using 
a valid scientific tool. If you so wish to spend your time, any 
decent scientific teport should contain all the data you need to 
plug into the calculator. 
By introducing the concept of mosaic brains and the statistics 
of sex differences versus similarities, ’m not trying to minimise 
of sidestep discussions of any differences that do exist. Rather, 
I'd like to encourage you out of the habit of asking ‘Are we 
differentr’ and instead ask more sophisticated questions such 
as, ‘What is the size’ of the difference? What are the similarities? 
What is my individual brain like?’ 
Clearly, the extent and nature of physical, psychological 
and behavioural differences in the brains of human females and 
males is highly controversial and politicised. Professor Margaret 
McCarthy, a neuroscientist who studies sex hormones and the 
developing brain, tactfully sums up the controversy by stating, 
‘Sex differences in the brain are more than some would like and 
less than others believe.” 
Nature, nurture or neuroplasticity? 
I’ve always been intrigued by how our brains are shaped by 
our lives, and how in turn our brains shape who we are. So, 
for my doctorate research I chose to explore the very earliest 
life events that influence how brain circuitry is sculpted. My 
doctoral thesis begins with the sentence, ‘My work will revisit 
the age-old nature versus nurture argument. What features of 
development depend on innate mechanisms, and what require 
experience?’ 
For three years I ran overnight experiments in a dusty ground- 
floot corner room in the University Laboratory of Physiology at 


[PDF page 24]

12 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Oxford. I painstakingly documented the development of brain 
cells (neurons) and their connections (synapses) in the visual 
cortex (the part of the brain that processes vision). I hoped to 
define which aspects of brain circuitry were shaped by innate 
biological mechanisms (nature) and which depended on life 
experiences (nurture). 
The final page of my thesis concludes, ‘In summary, it appears 
the circuitry of the brain changes during development. Both 
nature and nurture are involved.’ And when asked the inevitable 
question, ‘How’s the thesis?’ by my graduate friends over pints 
in a pub, all I could offer for my years of sleep deprivation was, 
‘T found out the.brain changes. It’s not nature or nurture. I think 
it’s probably a bit of both’ 
My research didn’t add anything too unexpected to the field 
but the results were neatly in line with the extensive body of 
literature supporting the view nature avd nurture ate necessary 
for witing up brain circuits during development. 
That was twenty years ago, and today there’s no longer a 
philosophical debate about which matters more. Nature and 
nurture cooperate. They work in synergy. Our brain is sculpted 
by genes, hormones, molecules and the innate patterns of 
neural activity that make up the ‘nature’ program, and by our 
childhood experiences, social connections, education, culture, 
and the world around us, all of which make up the ‘nurture’ 
program. Together, nature and nurture sculpt a brain. 
Your plastic mosaic brain 
Closely related to the notion that the brains of men and women 
are different is the idea that any differences are permanently 
hardwired by genes or hormone exposure in the womb. ‘The 
assumption is that nature matters, nurture doesn’t. The belief 


[PDF page 25]

INTRODUCTION 13 
that the brains of men and women are intrinsically different 
completely overlooks the fact that sex and gendet, like nature 
and nurture, interact. 
The misconception that sex differences are innate and 
therefore fixed flies in the face of the well-established fact that 
our brains are plastic and continue to change our whole lives. 
In one sense, brain development is never really ‘finished’ until 
we die. Every experience we have — from reading the words of 
this book, to entering puberty, to interacting with co-workers, 
to running a race, to loving a child — shapes our brains. The 
trillions of connections are continually flourishing or being 
pruned back, forming and re-forming, moulding and refining to 
fit our environment. 
The pink and blue pieces of the brain mosaic are not 
hardened fragments of ceramic glued in place in the womb, 
guided to their final positions by genes and prenatal hormones. 
Instead, pieces ate removed, remoulded, replaced, polished and 
honed throughout our lives. Our mosaic brains are plastic 
and distinctive artworks in progress. 
Because the aim of this book is not to spend time exploring 
the science of sex differences (and similarities), nor to smash 
apatt Mats versus Venus gender stereotypes, I recommend 
interested readers check out two excellent books: De/uszons 
of Gender: The Real Science Behind Sex Daufferences by feminist 
psychologist Cordelia Fine,'? and Pink Brain, Blue Brain: How 
Small Differences Grow into Troublesome Gaps — and What We Can Do 
About It by neuroscientist Lise Eliot." 
A disclaimer 
As a neuroscientist I was schooled not only in physiology, 
pharmacology and psychology, but also how to assess the weight 


[PDF page 26]

14 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
of evidence, consider various hypotheses and generate alternative 
explanations based on data. Academic papers also come with a 
series of disclaimers, outlining caveats of the work. 
Here are mine, to keep in mind when reading this book: 
Sex is biological and usually, but not always, straightforward. 
For some people, gender and sex are not as simple as “XX 
chromosomes make a girl and ‘XY chromosomes make a 
boy’. We’re now learning more about infants born with intersex 
conditions where their reproductive or sexual anatomy don’t fit 
the typical definitions of female or male. 
Gender is much more complicated again. Gender 1s a 
combination of .cultural, social, biological and psychological 
elements. Gender is how we look, act and feel. More often than 
not, gender and sex are aligned. In this case, a baby born with 
female genitals and presumably two X chromosomes grows 
up identifying as a girl or woman. Similarly, a baby born with 
a penis and presumably male XY chromosomes grows up 
identifying as a boy or man. People for whom gender identity 
and biological sex are in alignment are often referred to as 
‘cisgender’. The terminology for people whose gender and sex 
don’t match varies, but includes terms such as transgender, non- 
binary and gender non-conforming." 
Sexual orientation 1s different again and includes feelings 
of attraction (emotional, psychological, physical and/or sexual) 
towards other people. A person may be attracted to people of 
the same sex, to those of the opposite sex, to those of both 
sexes, or without reference to sex or gender at all.'” 
Unless I state otherwise, when I use terms like ‘git! or 
‘woman’ in this book, I’m referring to people who were born 
with female genitals, presumably with two X chromosomes; 
who were raised as girls and now identify as women. I’m very 
awate there are many people who don’t fit this traditional 


[PDF page 27]

INTRODUCTION 15 
classification, and including discussions of the neurobiology 
of intersex, transgendered or transsexual people would clearly 
enrich a book such as this; however, as there is often scant 
neuroscience research available, mostly this book is about 
cisgender girls and women. 
Determination of sex and gender are complex and the science 
is only just catching up on the reality of the spectrum. For 
those readers curious to learn more about the science ‘beyond’ 
the textbook definitions of male and female, sex and gender, the 
September 2017 issue of Sccentific American, ‘Sex and Gender: It’s 
Not a Women’s Issue’, provides a wonderfully useful overview.” 
You'll see I share some of my own stories in this book. I’m 
a cisgender straight woman, but I’m in no way implying my 
experiences represent the experiences of other women. 


[PDF page 28]

ja ie mwa cutalid decimals 
| ee | ep teepp ehggaai drat ee tev enRE pew SES . 
~ a0 © epelr we cr, eal Ge iyattaied © Hamre ~~, 
» o sC.ol (4lmows abides, Cae Supa eas 
‘tae kaye nngy aphemmgAby + ‘ert Qeleernic @rqenlccesy bape sm hella AY 
on) Contam age hie velhae qa Tee, (agian tay alied 
gue At woth opal nein aden ee ee 
Ab palsies Lene ep valve ad bine et sind ueipade | 
iM svdueni Aisi snail iii Lx zien THE andrea ipa 
ee ce ee ee 
pe ohuechalst Aptos crate Me arate han Waihi = 
a a A 
a ous nh mnie) eon, Tana 
oe Oa 9 4es 2) O eas, Ow ee ee 
Gas tb pe atts melee 0 Comabuny pore ng 
pins eno Lepr cine Psp Gevaert pass + ali : 
Ay GF eal = Ain eciateoendltect oirt a 2 he Veer kiitieey We a 
a a adem 
shee tileehhaPpem - mired 
a we: iy cet es 
yane peared, 
(at ae oa; mace Ras 
—- coupe <=. 
_ 


[PDF page 29]

In Utero 
The Great Sperm Race 
Armed with graph paper, a thermometer and a textbook 
understanding of the hormonal control of ovulation, I 
approached the business of trying to conceive with the earnest 
enthusiasm of a first-year PhD student. Fortunately, my body 
and husband cooperated and I’ve been a mum to two beautiful 
boys for the best part of a decade. While writing this chapter 
it came time for my husband to take our eldest son to the 
requisite ‘Where did I come from?’ evening at school. I waited 
impatiently at home and when they attived back (and despite 
my best attempt at cool, nonchalant parenting), my son had 
barely walked in the door when I asked, “So, where DO babies 
come fromp’ 
‘Well, it’s weird, embarrassing, but interesting too,’ he said. 
“The sperms swim up the channel. Half go the wrong way and 
die. The other half go the right way and find the egg, which is 
releasing a chemical. One sperm locks in and 1s the winner.’ 
The moment the winning sperm ‘locks in’ to the egg and 
bequeaths either an X or Y chromosome is life defining, and 
weird but interesting too. For most people, if you’re a biological 


[PDF page 30]

18 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
female, you inherited one X chromosome from your mother 
and one X from your father. If you ate biologically a male, you 
inherited your X chromosome from your mother and the Y 
from your father. 
The two sex chromosomes get their names because they 
look like the letters “X’ and ‘Y’ under a microscope. Along with 
another twenty-two pairs, chromosomes consist of two tightly 
wound double strands of DNA. DNA contains the instructions 
for our genes, and genes ate the instructions for making proteins. 
Our complete DNA instruction manual contains surprisingly 
few genes — about 20000 — of which one-third contain the 
instructions for building the brain."* 
The average neuron makes tens of thousands of connections, 
called synapses, with other neurons. And even if we're 
conservative, a brain of 86 billion neurons may contain as many 
as one hundred trillion synapses. If you’re savvy, you'll realise 
that the maths don’t add up: we have too many synapses for too 
few genes. 
It turns out the relationships between our genes, brains and 
behaviour are utterly complex. The DNA we inherited from our 
mother and father influences who we are, but not in a direct 
and simple way. In this book, we’ll explore how those trillions 
of synapses in the female brain make us who we are. You'll see 
that while genes provide the basic biological instructions for 
life, many other biological, social and psychological elements 
interact, synergise and alter the expression of genes. 
Implanting the egg 
Strictly speaking, the fertilised egg is called a zygote. For its first 
six to seven days of life the zygote bumps and rolls down the 
fallopian tube dividing multiple times until it becomes a hollow 


[PDF page 31]

IN UTERO 19 
ball of cells, called a blastocyst. Once the blastocyst reaches the 
uterus it embeds in the uterine wall, where cells keep dividing 
until the ball organises into two layers: one layer becomes the 
embryo and the other becomes the placenta.'® 
The placenta is not merely an interface between a baby and 
her mother. It acts as a giant gland releasing an assortment of 
hormones and chemical messengers crucial for maintaining 
pregnancy and preparing mum-to-be for birth. The placenta’s 
first job is to manufacture the pregnancy hormone human 
Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG). If you’ve ever anxiously waited 
for a thin blue line to appear after peeing on a pregnancy test, it’s 
an hCG chemical reaction you’te waiting for. hCG also triggers 
the cascade of hormones that stop your menstrual cycle."® 
Because the placenta derives from the same cells as the baby- 
to-be, either XX or XY, it too has a biological sex. Placental 
sex determines how the placenta works and how it buffers the 
baby against maternal stress, infection and diet. The placenta 
is central to sex differences in prenatal growth and survival, 
and the female placenta appears to be somewhat protective 
compared to the male.” 
The case of the neural tube 
is not yet closed 
By the time your pregnancy test is positive, or you skip a period 
(roughly two weeks after conception, or four weeks from your 
last petiod), your baby’s brain has begun to form. The nervous 
system is one of the earliest body systems to begin development 
and is one of the last to finish — our brains continue to mature 
well into our twenties and thirties. 
The human brain and spinal cord arise from the neural 
plate, which is a flattened layer of cells in the embedded 


[PDF page 32]

20 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
blastocyst. Following a well-orchestrated sequence of steps 
the flattened layer of cells folds, the edges bend to touch 
in the middle, close over and ‘zipper up’ to form a neural 
tube. Concerning ourselves with early events in brain 
development might seem overly detail-focused, but this phase 
is momentous because the entire nervous system emerges 
from the neural tube. 
You may have heard the term ‘neural tube’ spoken of before, 
usually in a very serious tone alongside the phrases ‘take your 
folic acid supplements’ and ‘birth defect’. Rightly so. The 
intricate and complex process of neural tube closure can go very 
wrong, and folate appears to play a protective role. Folate is the 
naturally occurring form of Vitamin B9 and 1s called folic acid 
when manufactured. 
If the neural tube fails to close correctly by twenty-eight 
days after conception a number of serious birth abnormalities 
can result, including spina bifida and anencephaly (literally 
meaning absence of brain). For all the evidence that folate 
ptevents neural tube defects, the exact mechanisms by 
which the essential vitamin contributes to the zippering 
up of the neural tube is still a mystery. As some researchers 
have quipped, the case of folate and the neural tube is far 
from closed.!® 
You were destined to be female 
You might be wondering when I'll address female brain 
development. The main reason I’ve been using androgynous 
terms so far is because for the first month or so after conception, 
male and female embryos are indistinguishable. Bear with me, 
because to understand female brain development we must first 
discuss male embryonic development. 


[PDF page 33]

IN UTERO 21 
When XY embryos are six to eight weeks old, a gene on the 
Y chromosome called the ‘sex-determining region of the Y 
chromosome’, or SRY for short, turns on. SRY contains the 
instructions for building a protein called ‘testis determining 
factor’, which guides development of the testes. SRY kickstarts 
a cascade of dozens of genes that are turned on in male embryos 
and turned off in female embryos." 
Jenny Graves, a professor of genetics at La Trobe 
University, explains that even though SRY is just one gene, 
the downstream effects of SRY are much more profound 
than simply building testicles. ‘Male hormones, such as 
testosterone, are synthesised by the embryonic testis and have 
far-flung effects all over the developing body. Androgens turn 
on hundreds (maybe thousands) of genes that determine male 
genitalia, male growth, hair, voice and elements of behaviour, 
she says.”” 
In the absence of a Y chromosome the default developmental 
option is for the foetus to become a female. 
‘Default’ is a term some people find a little dismissive. 
To help unravel the complexities of male versus female 
prenatal brain development, I called Margaret McCarthy, a 
professor of neuroscience who studies the effects of hormones 
on brain development at the University of Maryland School 
of Medicine. McCarthy is one of the pioneers in the field and 
conducted some of the first studies on how sex hormones 
organise the developing brain. ‘Default does not mean passive, 
was one of the first things she said to me in a tone of voice that 
had me convinced she’s made that statement more than once. 
‘Try using “the developing mammalian brain 1s destined for a 
female phenotype,” instead, she suggested. 
So now we know, all embryos ate destined to become female, 
unless the SRY gene in the Y chromosome turns on. 


[PDF page 34]

22 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Ovaries develop in the absence of 
the Y male chromosome 
An XX foetus has no Y chromosome, therefore no SRY gene; 
instead, other genes are turned on and off to actively promote 
the ovarian development program and suppress the testes 
program. 
Ovaries ate just one in a trio of structures that coordinate 
much of our reproductive lives. The trio goes by the name 
‘Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Ovarian axis’ (HPO axis) and consists 
of ovaries, and two brain structures called the hypothalamus 
and pituitary gland. 
Let’s take a brief look at the trio of structures, starting with 
the hypothalamus. It is found at the base of your brain under 
the thalamus (hence the name ‘hypo-thalamus’) next to its 
partner, the pituitary gland. Of all the regions of the brain, the 
hypothalamus is one of the busiest. It monitors and maintains 
the life essentials of temperature control, metabolism, hunger, 
thirst, aggression, sexual arousal, circadian rhythms and 
stress. It’s elaborately connected to other brain regions via 
neural pathways, and to the rest of the body by its rich supply 
of blood vessels, thus enabling it to coordinate the brain’s 
response to the body. 
The close proximity of the hypothalamus and the pituitary 
gland is important, as hormones and other neurochemicals from 
the hypothalamus are secreted into a series of blood vessels that 
connect directly to the anterior pituitary. This portal allows for 
rapid and direct communication. 
The anterior pituitary is often referred to as the ‘master 
gland’ because its hormones stimulate and coordinate glands, 
tissue and organs elsewhere, including the ovaries. But the 
term master gland is a misnomer, because the pituitary’s 


[PDF page 35]

IN UTERO 23 
master is the hypothalamus, which tightly controls all action 
that takes place. 
Finally, we have the ovaries. They’re found tucked away 
in the lower abdomen, far, far away from the brain. Ovaries 
produce and release hormones and eggs (oocytes), and by 
halfway through her time in utero, a baby gitl’s ovaries contain 
about five million oocytes. In a developmental theme that will 
shortly become familiar to you, two-thirds of these oocytes 
die off such that a newborn has about half to one million 
oocytes. By the time she reaches puberty, a girl’s oocyte count 
will have dwindled to a few hundred thousand. Give or take a 
few pregnancies, on average 450 eggs will be released over the 
course of her lifetime. 
Ovaries respond to hormonal signals from the pituitary 
that arrive via the bloodstream by secreting hormones of their 
own — primarily oestrogen during the first half of the menstrual 
cycle, but also the hormone progesterone once ovulation is 
established. As they mature, they get better at responding to 
signals from the brain, and part of this maturation is reflected 
in the ‘settling’ of the menstrual cycle during early adolescence. 
It can take a few years for a mature ovulation cycle to be 
established. 
From puberty, one of the most important roles of the 
HPO axis is to regulate release of ovarian hormones including 
oestrogen. Oestrogen isn’t a single hormone; rather oestrogens are 
a group of three hormones: oestradiol, oestriol and oestrone. 
2 Oestradiol is the main oestrogen manufactured by the 
ovaries. It is important for the development of secondary 
sex characteristics such as breasts, and for the menstrual 
cycle and pregnancy. Synthetic versions of oestradiol are 
used in contraceptive pills. 


[PDF page 36]

24 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Q Oestrio/ is made by the placenta. Oestriol is barely 
detectable unless you’re pregnant, when levels increase 
1000-fold. 
Q Oestrone is another less-potent oestrogen produced by the 
ovaries and it doesn’t dominate till after menopause. 
To keep things simple, and unless it’s important to differentiate 
between the three oestrogens, Pll use the umbrella term 
‘oestrogen’ throughout this book. 
Sex hormones organise reproductive 
_ regions of the prenatal brain 
Mother Nature is selfish. Her one and only goal 1s for us to have 
sex and make babies. To ensure dating and mating occurs, the 
patts of our brain that control reproduction, in particular 
the hypothalamus, become ‘masculinised’ or ‘feminised’ to 
match our male or female gonads. 
Hormones influence how these reproductive brain circuits 
grow and respond. Prenatal life is the first of two life phases 
when the brain is super-sensittve to sex hormones. ‘We call this 
eatly period of hormone exposure the organisational period, 
as it organises or programs the brain to respond to hormones 
in adulthood, explains McCarthy. Many sex differences that 
do exist are developmentally organised and then activated, or 
revealed, by the action of hormones during the second phase, 
puberty. 
During the prenatal period, the dominating influence is that 
of testosterone produced by foetal testes. ‘Testosterone helps 
to ensure that the reproductive regions of the brain in males 
become masculinised. At the same time, and in the absence of 
testosterone, brain regions involved in reproductive behaviours 
in females become feminised. 


[PDF page 37]

IN UTERO 25 
What is the role of oestrogen in 
female brain development? 
You might be wondering, if testosterone ‘masculinises’ the 
unborn baby boy, does oestrogen from foetal ovaries play a role 
in in ‘feminising’ the unborn baby girl? 
Believe it or not, foetal oestrogen plays no role at all. Female 
embryos do not require ovarian hormones to become feminised 
(remember, they’re destined to become female). Oestrogen’s role 
in the developing female brain is thus a by-product of its absence, 
rather than presence. 
Unborn babies’ brains are also shielded from the influence of 
maternal oestrogens (made by their mother and the placenta) by 
a molecule called alpha-fetoprotein, which is made in the liver 
of an unborn baby. It binds to oestrogen in the bloodstream and 
prevents maternal oestrogen crossing into the baby’s brain.*' 
Curiously, oestrogen is involved in organising the architecture 
of the ma brain. Testosterone easily passes into unborn baby 
boys’ brains where it is converted to oestradiol by an enzyme 
called aromatase. It is now well established that the ‘female’ 
hormone oestradiol is responsible for ‘masculinising’ the male 
brain in utero. 
Mother Nature is selfish. And she also has a sense of humout. 
Joining the dots from brain to behaviour 
Sex differences in achievement in maths, interest in technology 
subjects or ability in the sciences are often solely attributed 
to the presence (or absence) of testosterone in the womb. 
In 2005, Harvard University president Lawrence Summers 
controversially suggested that innate biological differences 
(namely, prenatal testosterone) explain why men have more 
career success in mathematics than women — he later resigned. 


[PDF page 38]

26 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
A Google softwate engineer trotted out the same argument in 
August 2017 to explain why fewer women succeed in STEM 
careers than men and to rail against diversity training — he was 
fired. 
Most scientists who study sex differences agree the weight of 
evidence finds prenatal testosterone doesn’t directly determine 
adult academic achievement or career choice. Cordelia Fine 
points out that investigations of sex differences due to hormones 
are often correlational, and they tend to imply that hormonal 
level is the primary cause, rather than taking into account the 
fact that our biology is ‘entangled’ with our life experiences and 
social context.” 
Prenatal hormones may provide ‘a small push in one 
direction’.'' That early ‘push’ can be either enhanced or entirely 
eliminated by how girls and boys are raised. My thinking is 
this: it was rare for women to work as politicians, lawyers and 
doctors even sixty years ago. There were few female scientists, 
engineers of mathematicians (and possibly very few women 
authoring neuroscience books). It’s clear to me that small sex 
differences apparent in the brains of unborn infants cannot 
teliably explain the enormous gender inequalities we see in 
society. Our society’s attitudes and cultural expectations of the 
capabilities of girls and women and our place in the workplace 
have changed dramatically. Prenatal hormone levels haven't. 
It’s proving much harder than you might think for 
neuroscientists to draw a straight line from prenatal hormones 
to brain to behaviour. We struggle to connect the dots in 
carefully controlled studies of rodents in the research lab, let 
alone in humans. This can be attributed most simply to the fact 
that extensive networks of brain cells control who we are and how 
we behave. One role of those networks is to integrate multiple 
sources of information. Throughout the lifespan, social, cultural 


[PDF page 39]

IN UTERO 27 
and psychological influences combine with biology in complex 
ways to determine how we think, feel and behave. 
ORE pts, Top-Down 
. Thoughts/Cognition 
.. Emotions/Feelings 
Mindset, Beliefs 
BOlthiitel-cila 
- Social Support, Stress, 
* Life Events, Education, 
Environment 
Bottom-Up 
Genes, Hormones, 
Immune System, 
Nutrition, Exercise, Steep 
Figure 2. The Bottom-Up Outside-In Top-Down Model. 
I developed the Bottom-Up Outside-In Top-Down model for 
my students to provide a framework within which to consider 
how biological, psychological and social factors impact on the 
brain over the lifespan. 
2 Bottom-Up elements are the biological or physiological 
determinants of brain health, development and ageing. They 
include genes, hormones, the immune system, nutrition, 
exercise, sleep and other lifestyle choices we make. 
Q Outside-In elements include your social circle, living 
environment, life events, education, current circumstances, 
external stressors and family background. 
Q ‘Top-Down elements include thoughts, emotions, 
personality, mindset and belief systems. 


[PDF page 40]

28 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Not only do these many elements regulate the development, 
performance and health of the brain, each element influences 
others in dynamic ways. 
For example: 
2 Our thoughts and feelings can influence our physical 
experience of pain, which is why outside-in stress can 
exacerbate top-down perceptions of bottom-up pain. 
2 Social connection can directly impact our brain health, 
which is why folks who are socially isolated are at greater 
risk of dementia. 
Q Our physical health and mood are intimately entwined, 
which is why bottom-up exercise is key for top-down 
emotional regulation and can be used to treat depression. 
How to build a brain 
If you've ever attended a neurosurgery (or watched one on 
YouTube), you might have noticed that living human brains are 
neither pink nor blue. They’re a pulsating purplish grey. The 
wrinkly outermost layer of cortex, the grey matter, gets its name 
from its appearance, and it contains cell bodies of neurons, their 
branching extensions called dendrites and other cell types called 
glia. A centimetre below the surface runs white matter consisting 
of nerve bundles that connect different regions of grey matter 
together. 
Traditionally, the cortex is subdivided into four lobes per 
hemisphere: frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital. Broadly 
speaking, each lobe has a job: the occipital lobes process vision; 
the temporal lobes process sound, speech and memory; parietal 
lobes integrate our senses and movement; and the frontal lobes, 
which are larger and more evolved by far in humans than any 


[PDF page 41]

IN UTERO 29 
other creature, control movement, language, abstract reasoning 
and attention. 
How do we know which part of the brain does what? The 
opening line of Oliver Sacks’s masterpiece The Man Who Mistook 
Fis Wife for a Hat gives us a clue: ‘Neurology’s favourite word 
is deficit.” Deficits in function caused by a stroke perhaps, or a 
brain tumour, gave neurologists their first insight into what is 
called ‘localisation of function’.* 
As Sacks tells us, the scientific study of the relationship 
between the brain and mind began in 1861 when French 
neurologist Paul Broca found speech problems always followed 
damage to a particular portion of the left temporal lobe. ‘This 
opened the way to mapping the human brain, ascribing specific 
powers — linguistic, intellectual, emotional, visual and so 
on — to equally specific parts of the brain. During my PhD I 
spent hundreds of hours poking tungsten micro-electrodes four 
millimetres deep into the portion of occipital cortex where | 
knew with certainty I could record inputs from one eye or the 
other. Similarly, neurosurgeons use stimulating electrodes to 
carefully map the brain before they pick up their scalpel, thus 
avoiding damaging critical regions. Modern-day functional 
MRI ((MRI) maps blood flow as a stand-in for brain activity 
and therefore localisation of function. 
A particular job or trait 1s never ‘hardwired’ into a specific 
cortical location for life. Remember, our brains are plastic 
and change in response to experience. During my tungsten 
micro-electrode recording sessions I was able to manipulate 
an individual neuron’s preference for the left or right eye 
depending on whether one or the other eye was blindfolded. 
Other researchers have shown visual neurons can even learn to 
respond to sound if neural inputs from the ear are encouraged 
to reroute. This capacity for plasticity underlies our ability to 


[PDF page 42]

30 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
learn and remember, and to recover from brain injury such as 
stroke. 
Dig a little deeper and we see the brain’s regional 
specificity is supported by diversity. Even the seemingly 
simplest of neural structures is made up of a huge assortment 
of cell types. In the retina of the eye there are dozens of 
classes of neuron, and in the spinal cord more than one 
hundred different types of specialised neurons project to 
muscles. Diversity comes about in the early embryo by way of 
chemical gradients and signalling molecules. Head-to-tail or 
left-right patterns, for example, are determined by how near 
ort far a cell is from a source of a chemical that influences 
which genes switch on or off, thereby determining what type 
of cell develops. 
The diversity and the precise connections formed by many 
billions of neurons during in utero development underlie the 
wondrous capacity of our brains and minds. A brain that allows 
us to love, feel, move through the world, create artworks, send 
satellites into space and even, when damaged as Sacks’s patient’s 
brain was, ‘teach out his hand, take hold of his wife’s head, try 
to lift it off and put it on’. 
The birth of new brain cells 
Going from a few hundred cells rolled up in a neural tube to 
the 86 billion extraordinarily diverse cell types present in a 
newborn’s brain involves a colossal amplification of numbers. 
Simple maths tells us that a quarter to a half a million neurons 
are born per minute during in utero life. The proliferation 
of massive numbers of brain cells comes down to one type 
of cell — the stem cell. 
Stem cells evoke images of crazy scientists, hopeful therapies 
for cancer and Parkinson’s disease, and ethical controversies 


[PDF page 43]

IN UTERO 31 
ovet using aborted human foetal tissue. But their natural 
existence is rather less melodramatic. 
Stem cells possess a couple of unique qualities: they divide 
endlessly, making multiple copies of themselves, and they can 
differentiate into any cell type found in the body. Neral stem 
cells, as their name suggests, produce all cell types found in the 
brain and nervous system, including both neurons and glia. The 
ptocess by which neurons ate born from stem cells is called 
neurogenesis, and when glia are born the process is called ghogenesis. 
Glia make up half the cells in the brain and come in three 
main subtypes: asttocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia. 
The word ‘glia’ is Greek for ‘glue’, because it was once assumed 
glia existed solely to ‘glue’ neurons in place. But glia provide 
much more than structural support. They offer nutritional 
support to neurons, clear toxins while we sleep (astrocytes), 
insulate the axons of neurons with myelin (oligodendrocytes, 
ot Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system), and act 
as the brain’s innate immune system (microglia). Gliogenesis 
persists across the human lifespan and the losses and gains of 
oligodendrocytes, for example, can be visualised in brain scans 
as changes in volume or density of white matter. 
Neurogenesis in the adult human brain is less well 
understood. Neurogenesis was first described in middle-aged 
people in a landmark paper using atmospheric Carbon-14 levels, 
a type of carbon atom generated by nuclear bombs that becomes 
integrated into DNA. From 1955 to 1963, there were elevated 
atmospheric Carbon-14 levels caused by above-ground nuclear 
bomb testing during the cold war. Carbon-14 reacts with oxygen 
to form CO2, which is taken up by plants in photosynthesis, 
and when we eat plants, or animals that live off plants, we 
take up Carbon-14 into cells that are dividing creating a ‘date 
mark’ in the DNA. For people alive during the Cold War 


[PDF page 44]

32 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
years, any newborn neurons in their brains became ‘tagged’ 
with Carbon-14. Using this innovative strategy, neuroscientists 
estimate 700 new Carbon-14-tagged neurons are born in each 
middle-aged human hippocampus daily. The hippocampus 
(from the Greek for ‘seahorse’, which it resembles) is the brain’s 
centre for learning and memory.” 
Understandably, there is plenty of excitement around 
neurogenesis, in particular its therapeutic prospects and 
implications for brain ageing. After all, who doesn’t love the 
notion we continually add new brain cells daily rather than losing 
them as we ager While seemingly impressive, 700 neurons per day 
represents only. 0.004 per cent of the total of one cell type in the 
hippocampus and that figure 1s ten-fold lower than seen in the 
rodents used to model neurological diseases. So some scientists 
question how such a relatively small number of newborn neurons 
contribute to complex behaviours and psychiatric disorders.” ‘To 
dampen your enthusiasm a little further, you should realise that 
the vast majority of neurogenesis research has since been done 
in lab animals, not humans. We know rodent neurogenesis is 
slowed by stress, depression or inflammation, and sped up by 
antidepressants, exercise and learning. However, we simply don’t 
know if the same happens 1n adult human brains. 
Zika virus disrupts brain cell migration 
In late 2015, global newspapers started reporting on the unusually 
large numbers of babies born with shrunken malformed heads 
(microcephaly) in South America, in particular Brazil. There 
were plenty of theories flying round, but most evidence pointed 
towards an outbreak of mosquito-born Zika virus as the cause. 
In the run-up to the 2016 Rio Olympics many international 
travellers and athletes considered skipping the games to avoid 
the threat. 


[PDF page 45]

IN UTERO 33 
It turns out Zika virus infects a type of brain cell called 
‘radial glia’. 
Besides acting as neural stem cells, radial glia provide the 
scaffold along which newborn neurons migtate. If you were 
to slice a section through the developing neural tube you'd see 
radial glia spanning the thickness of the wall of the tube, rather 
like spokes in a bike wheel. Once neurons are born, they crawl 
from the inside of the tube along radial glia until they reach 
their home. Each subsequent newborn neuron crawls over the 
top of those already nestled into place, such that the six layers 
of cortex develop in an inside-first outside-last fashion. In this 
way, the birthdate of a neuron determines its final postcode. 
Once their crucial roles in development are complete, radial glia 
retract their processes, ball up and differentiate into astrocytes. 
At the time of writing, research points towards Zika infection 
of radial glia being the cause of defects in babies whose mothers 
contracted the virus when pregnant. When the Zika virus infects 
radial glial cells, it stops their growth, division and survival, 
which in turn cuts the number of neurons born and migrating 
into position. This may be the mechanism by which babies are 
26, 27 being born with grossly underdeveloped brains. 
Half of all neurons are born to die 
In a healthy pregnancy, the vast majority of neurogenesis is 
complete by about months five to six. Then something rather 
unexpected happens: half of all the neurons that have been 
born die. 
Neurons die via a highly regulated process of cellular suicide 
called apoptosis; derived from the Greek word for leaves falling 
off a tree. It sounds wasteful, but apoptosis is important for 
establishing final numbers of neurons and glia, and for matching 
the number of neurons to the size of the final targets that they 


[PDF page 46]

34 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
innervate. Outside of the brain, the role of apoptosis is clearer: a 
foetus’s hand starts out as a flattened webbed-like structure similar 
to a duck’s foot; to reveal human-like fingers, the cells in the 
webbed tissue between the fingers shrivel and die by apoptosis. 
Molecules guide axons to their targets 
‘The brain is a world consisting of a number of unexplored 
continents and great stretches of unknown territory, wrote 
Santiago Ramon y Cajal, a Spanish neuroscientist and 1906 Nobel 
laureate, often referred to as the godfather of modern neuroscience. 
Cajal was right. After birth and migration to their final 
postcode, and if they’re not the fifty per cent pre-programmed 
to die, all neurons sprout projections. Many of the projections, 
called dendrites, look rather like the branches of a tree and act as 
the neuron’s input-receivers — they listen in to signals being sent 
to them from other neurons. The output structure of the neuron, 
the axon, is a long slender vine-like projection that transmits 
electrical signals away from the neuron’s cell body. Once the 
neuron settles into its home and sprouts projections, the long 
vine-like axon sets off on a secondary migration all of its own. 
The growing tip of the axon called the growth cone is a 
wonder. It’s a sensory structure that can navigate by following 
the molecular and chemical signposts in the environment, and 
a motor whose activity physically propels the axon across the 
terrain of the foetal brain. Axons can project short distances 
and connect to neighbours mere microns away, or extend over 
metres (all the way down the spinal cord to your big toe) — a 
navigational feat likened to a baby crawling from Perth, say, 
to a Sydney harbourside apartment building and managing to 
knock on the correct door. Once the growing axon reaches its 
destination, the growth cone collapses and differentiates into a 
specialised structure called a synapse. 


[PDF page 47]

IN UTERO 35 
Synapses are miniature zones of communication 
Two neurons don’t touch; instead, they are separated by the 
smallest of gaps called a synapse. The purpose of a synapse 
is to convert an electrical signal into a chemical signal, which 
catries the message across the narrow synaptic cleft, where it’s 
converted back into an electrical signal by the receiving neuron. 
You will have heard of some of the most famous signalling 
chemicals, neurotransmitters such as dopamine, oxytocin, and 
serotonin. Despite their fame, neurons containing them are 
comparatively rare in the brain, and they merely modify the 
actions of the two major neurotransmitters: glutamate, which 
excites neural activity, and GABA, which inhibits neural 
activity. Changes in the structure and numbers of synapses 
ate fundamental to how our brains change. Most psychoactive 
drugs, from coffee to nicotine to cocaine to antidepressants, act 
at the synapse. And as we'll learn in later chapters, synapses are 
modified by learning and experience. ‘This is known as synaptic 
plasticity and endows each of us with our individual brains. 
Use it or lose it 
In early development, there is a massive superabundance of 
synapses. Fat mote connections are made than ate requited. So, 
rather like the fifty per cent of neurons that die, superfluous 
synapses are pruned away. 
Prenatal synaptic pruning can go wrong, and when it does it 
can result in a rather intriguing condition called synaesthesia. 
As Oliver Sacks described, normally each area of our brain is 
specialised for the processing of information from one type 
of input. For people with synaesthesia, inappropriate pruning 
of synapses leaves the ‘wrong’ brain areas connected together. 
People with synaesthesia can ‘hear’ colours or ‘taste’ shapes, and 


[PDF page 48]

36 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
their descriptions of how they perceive the world might include, 
‘January is a pale apple-green colour’ or “he note middle C 
tastes like beef stock.’ Such rich, creative portrayals of the world 
are typical for about four per cent of the population who don’t 
suffer so much as ate géfied with synaesthesia. 
The first 1000 days of brain development 
There ate roughly 1000 days from conception until a child 
reaches her second birthday. These first 1000 days have emerged 
as a ctitical window of opportunity in which to build the 
foundation fora child’s ability to grow, learn, and contribute in 
the future. 
What can we do to support the first 280 of the 1000 daysr 
As we know, adequate folate in the diet or via supplements 
reduces the risk of neural tube defects. Alcohol and smoking are 
also the other two obvious avoidable sources of harm. Babies of 
mothers who drink excessively during pregnancy show reduced 
brain growth and brain volume, and the microstructure of their 
neurons and synapses is altered. Nicotine affects axonal path- 
finding and synapse formation, and carbon monoxide inhaled 
from cigarettes leads to foetal hypoxia (lack of oxygen), all of which 
thwart normal brain development. Interestingly, boys ate more 
likely to suffer the effects of maternal smoking than girls. This 
might be linked to the protective effects of the female placenta.” 
Worrying about worry 
During my first pregnancy it felt like so much could go wrong — 
imagine if I inhaled passive smoke or forgot my pregnancy 
vitamins? Yeats researching brain development made me way too 
awate of how sensitive the prenatal period is for baby humans. 
I found pregnancy very stressful. And when my mum reminded 


[PDF page 49]

IN UTERO 37 
me that ‘stressing out’ was going to stress my baby I naturally 
started feeling stressed about how stressed I was feeling. 
During a healthy pregnancy, levels of the stress hormone 
cottisol rise two to three fold but the baby is buffered from 
‘normal but high’ maternal cortisol by an enzyme in the placenta. 
However, it’s thought that extreme stress or trauma — such as 
that caused by natural disasters, violence or serious illness — can 
modify the activity of the enzyme, potentially ‘transferring’ the 
stress to the baby. Overexposure of cortisol in utero is thought 
to be one of the key mechanisms linking early life development 
with later life disease. What happens in the womb at different 
points in development can affect the baby after birth, during 
childhood and well into adulthood — a concept known as ‘foetal 
programming’.”” 
For once, my mum was wrong. Norma/ levels of maternal 
angst don’t harm unborn babies. In fact, angst might have the 
opposite effect. One study of ninety-four healthy women by 
Johns Hopkins University researchers found that ‘non-clinical 
maternal anxiety’ (1.e., the typical level of worrying by a first- 
time parent) or non-specific pregnancy stress (e.g. worrying how 
much the baby is moving) was beneficial to the babies. Children 
born to mothers who exhibited high versus low levels of non- 
clinical maternal anxiety and non-specific stress showed more 
advanced motor and cognitive development at age two.”! 
The authors say they hope their findings may provide relief 
to women who have a tendency to worry about worrying. I wish 
V’d known about this study when I was pregnant! 
The Montreal Ice Storm Study 
Natural disasters provide a convenient if unfortunate ‘natural 
experiment’ for looking at how very stressful events can impact 
brain development before birth. One such natural experiment 


[PDF page 50]

38 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
took place in the Canadian province of Quebec in January 1998 
when an ice storm dumped so much frozen rain on the city, 
thousands of transmission towers collapsed under the weight of 
ice. The electricity grid was crippled and three million people, 
including hundreds of pregnant women, were without power for 
at least forty-five days at the most brutally cold time of the year. 
Five months after the disaster, a team from McGill University, 
led by psychiatrist Suzanne King, saw a unique opportunity. The 
ice storm would enable them to study the effects of maternal 
stress on the development of children who were 1n utero at the 
time. King’s team recruited a few hundred women who had 
been pregnant during the disaster, and they’ve closely followed 
the outcomes of the children in the decades since.” 
Project Ice Storm babies were born smaller and earlier than 
expected, especially if the storm occurred very early or very late 
in the pregnancy. As infants, they exhibited delays in cognitive 
and language development. When they were assessed at age five, 
the language and cognitive delays remained and they also showed 
increased rates of attention and behavioural problems. Ice Storm 
‘babies’ ate now teenagers and they’re still showing the effects 
of their stressful start to life. In girls, prenatal maternal stress 
increased their risk of early puberty, obesity and asthma. In some 
children, their fingerprint patterns (a measure of developmental 
asymmetry typically seen in people with schizophrenia) are altered. 
Overall, the boys tended to fare worse than the girls. King 
and her colleagues suggest some of this difference might have 
arisen from differences in the placenta, whereby the female 
placenta seems to provide protection against high levels of 
maternal stress hormones. 
Project Ice Storm has shown how intimately an unborn child 
is connected to her mother. A mother’s physical and emotional 
state profoundly impact in utero and childhood development. 


[PDF page 51]

IN UTERO 39 
‘The implication of our research is the unborn child is more 
fragile and sensitive to the mother’s environment than we 
thought,’ says King. ‘Our advice to mothers is to avoid or conttol 
stress if possible.’ Of course, natural disasters can’t be controlled 
ot prevented, but King says that pregnant women and those 
supporting them should do whatever they can to limit their 
distress. We’ll come back to this theme of stress and the vital 
tole of social buffering time and time again during the book. 
A newborn brain is a rough 
draft ready for editing 
In 1928, Cajal wrote, ‘at first, many imperfect connections 
are formed, and many errors of distribution occur ... but 
the incongtruences ate progressively corrected’. Cajal was 
tight again. The processes of synapse formation, refinement 
and elimination provide a mechanism by which experiences, 
encoded as electrical signals, modify brain circuits both during 
prenatal development, childhood, the teenage years and well 
into adulthood. 
The brain of our ready-to-be-born baby girl is about to be 
inscribed with the story of her life. Mother Nature has provided 
a rough draft. Her chapter outline is present, but the paragraphs, 
sentences and words, interwoven with the narrative, grammar 
and punctuation, will be written and rewritten, edited and 
continually revised over her lifespan. 
In the next chapter, we'll take a look at what happens once 
out baby girl emerges from the womb into the world, where the 
toles of society and culture, parental expectations and beliefs, 
and personal experiences start to engender her brain. 


[PDF page 52]

Childhood 
- * 
Ir WAS A DRIZZLY AUTUMNAL EVENING IN 2008 WHEN, TO MY 
dismay, my obstetrician perfunctorily stated, ‘It’s a boy’. I'd always 
had a strong feeling I was carrying a boy, so I wasn’t disappointed 
I had a son. Instead, I was annoyed that after a night and day of 
hard labour the doctor took it upon himself to announce the sex 
of my firstborn, and in such a routine, offhand manner. 
Nineteen months later and under the care of a different 
doctor, I had a single line written in my birth plan: ‘Husband is 
to announce baby’s sex.’ After a shorter, easier second labour my 
second-born was hoisted above me. ‘It’s another boy!’ I cried. ‘I 
didn’t say a word!’ was the obstetrician’s quick response. Luckily, 
my husband was too enthralled with his new son to mind that 
this time I made the call. 
From the very moment a baby is born, the first words 
he or she will hear are usually ‘it’s a boy’ or ‘it’s a girl’. 
Because human children are born into a gendered world, to 
understand development of the female human brain we have 
to understand the influence and expectations of gender. 
In the last chapter, we looked at the influence of genes and 
hormones on brain development in utero. Assuming Mum 
40 


[PDF page 53]

CHILDHOOD 41 
is healthy, well nourished, buffers stress and can avoid toxins, 
biology is queen in determining how the brain grows in the 
cocoon of the womb. In this chapter, we'll consider how 
childhood brain development is a product of not only bottom-up 
biology, but complex social and environmental influences. 
When we left off last chapter, an innate and exquisitely 
orchestrated process of neural folding, proliferation, migration, 
navigation and cell death had resulted in a ‘rough draft’ nervous 
system. When our newborn girl is catapulted from the protective 
environment of in utero life to the vibrant outside world, her 
brain is about a third of the size of an adult brain, and capable of 
coordinating only basic reflexes: suckling, crying, sleeping. From 
birth onwards, growth is extraordinary and the rough draft 
is sculpted and customised by her interaction with the world. 
During infancy, childhood and adolescence, life experiences — 
good and bad — leave their lasting imprints on the brain. 
Brain development from birth to adulthood 
Once upon a time, it was assumed brains stop growing by 
the time children started school. Evidence for this was based 
on post-mortem studies. To all appearances, 5-year-old and 
45-year-old brains were identical. It wasn’t until the advent of 
safe modern brain imaging that anyone felt able to peer inside 
children’s skulls to see if this was true.” 
Since the 1990s, MRI technologies have shown brain growth 
certainly is most rapid during the first few years of life, but 
development continues well beyond the kindergarten years. 
Catherine Lebel is a neuroscientist at the University of Calgary 
in Canada who uses vatious MRI techniques to chart brain 
development. She tells me her research tries to answer a very 
simple question: How does the brain change during childhood? 


[PDF page 54]

42 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
For one study, Lebel invited 103 children and young 
adults ranging in age from five to thirty to visit her lab. 
Each volunteer’s brain was scanned using an advanced MRI 
technique called Diffusion ‘Tensor Imaging (DTT) that gives 
unique information about brain microstructure. All volunteers 
were scanned at least twice about four years apart (some were 
scanned three or four times). The 221 scans charted how 
white and grey matter grew and changed over childhood, 
adolescence and into adulthood. 
Lebel found that between ages five and thirty white matter 
volume increased while at the same time grey matter volume 
decreased. Because white-matter increases and grey-matter 
decreases offset one another, total brain volume didn’t change 
much at all. °° 
Although this particular study didn’t look at brains older than 
thirty, numerous other imaging studies have found white matter 
volume continues to increase to a peak at about age fifty and 
is then gradually lost with normal ageing.” Some witty folk 
have quipped that this reflects the morphological development 
of wisdom.** Grey matter loss slows down by the time we 
reach our twenties and the thickness of the cortex then stays 
reasonably stable until degeneration sets in with old age. Lebel’s 
studies show the process of healthy brain development is orderly, 
follows a predictable pattern and tracks alongside the emergence 
of skills and behaviours. As brains get more organised, efficient 
and sophisticated, so too do the owners of those brains. 
Taking a closer look at white 
and grey matter 
If you closely examine a fresh slice of human brain or one of 
Lebel’s DTI scans, you'll see two kinds of neural tissue: an 


[PDF page 55]

CHILDHOOD 43 
outer folded layer of greyish—purple matter, and the underlying 
fibrous white matter. 
Grey matter makes up the cortex and some deeper brain 
structures such as the amygdala and hippocampus (collectively 
called the limbic system). Grey matter contains cell bodies of 
neurons, their dendrites, and glia such as astrocytes. 
White matter consists of axon bundles that connect 
different structures ot parts of grey matter together. White 
matter tracts can be very short, span from the left to right 
hemisphere, or stretch down the spinal cord. 
If you were to look down a microscope and zoom in on 
thin slices of white matter sliced from children’s brains at 
different ages (or slices of rat brain, if that makes you feel more 
comfortable), you’d see the developmental modifications Lebel 
described often have little to do with the neurons themselves. 
White matter modifications are due to oligodendrocytes, 
which extend long, thin, flattened processes that wrap round 
axons, like layer upon layer of protective cling film. The 
oligodendrocyte wraps are made of a fatty white substance 
called myelin that provides electrical insulation to axons and 
gives white matter its name. Changes in white matter volume 
therefore reflect how thickly wrapped axons are with myelin. 
This directly determines how well electrically insulated axons 
ate, and thus how efficiently neurons are able to communicate. 
Quite simply, more myelin means faster communication. 
As I mentioned in chapter 1, half of all neurons born in the 
developing brain die, but most cell death is complete before 
birth. Grey matter shrinkage during childhood and adolescence 
is mostly due to loss of superfluous synapses or connections 
between neurons. 
While it seems like a terrible waste to kill off half of all 
newborn neurons and prune away half of the sprouting synapses, 


[PDF page 56]

44 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
massive proliferation followed by removal is how the brain 
streamlines networks so it works more efficiently and adapts to 
the world we live in. 
How do neurons choose their synaptic partners? And which 
synapses are retained and which are removed? 
Professor Colin Akerman is a neuroscientist at Oxford 
University, and his research attempts to answer this question. 
Akerman and I shated the same ground-floor physiology lab 
during our PhD studies, and we caught up over coffee in the 
Department of Pharmacology in Oxford one rainy morning 
while I was writing this book. I asked how he describes ‘synaptic 
matching’. -, 
“The type, strength and distribution of synaptic connections 
determine the behaviour of individual neurons within a neural 
network, he told me. “These synaptic circuits develop through 
a combination of hardwired genetic mechanisms and plastic 
activity-dependent processes.’ Nature, nurture or a bit of both, 
one might say. 
“The decision 1s made in a “use it or lose it” fashion,’ he says. 
‘Competitions take place between neural inputs, whereby some 
>? 
axons ate more electrically active and “win” and those less 
active “lose” and get removed.’ 
When Akerman and I were students, the phrases ‘cells that 
fire together, wire together’ and ‘synapses out of sync fail to 
link’ were only just coming into common use. The two phrases 
ate shorthand ways to describe how experience, in the form of 
neural activity, causes pre- and post-synaptic neurons to ‘fire 
together’ and ‘wire together’. Synapse selection and elimination 
is coordinated by experience in a ‘use it or lose it’ fashion. Neural 
activity is the biological tool by which childhood experiences 
sculpt and streamline each individual brain. 


[PDF page 57]

CHILDHOOD 45 
Brain architecture is built 
by early experiences 
Human babies are born far more immature than most species. 
Newborn gazelle stagger to their feet within moments of birth. 
We can barely stagger to our feet a year later. But as we're 
learning, this long, slow development is what makes us human, 
and we quickly outpace the gazelle. 
Within her first two years, a baby learns to lift her head, 
sit, walk, run and’ climb. She loses her primitive grasping 
reflexes and learns to coordinate her hands to grab and feed 
herself, to hold a crayon and even draw a straight line. She 
learns to understand what is being said to her and to follow 
simple instructions, and begins to express herself using simple 
sentences, often with great conviction. Her personality — the 
unique set of psychological qualities that influence how she 
thinks, feels and behaves — begins to emerge. 
By the time she starts school, she’s a social little creature who 
is developing relationships separate from her immediate family. 
She has her own friends, temperament, likes and dislikes. She 
can tell stories, create art and 1s ready to learn to read, spell and 
do simple maths. Her capacity to think, problem solve, interact 
with others, show empathy and even develop a theory of mind 
(her awareness of others’ states of mind) is emerging. 
Children don’t learn these skills in isolation. Every neural 
process, every thought, feeling and behaviour they develop, 
is embedded in and influenced by the world around them. 
Interaction with people, places and things is an absolute 
requirement for healthy brain development. 
Children learn best by play. They’re driven by an evolutionary 
urge to play, do, taste, explore, feel, smell, experiment and 


[PDF page 58]

46 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
interact — with people and animals, pots and pans in the bottom 
drawer, and puddles of rain. It’s by interacting so intensely with 
the world that their brains develop. Young brains are primed 
to learn and grow by experience, and the requirement for 
experience to refine synapses and develop skills is unconditional. 
Our large, complex, social brains require a long experience- 
rich childhood to develop. It’s been said our extended childhoods 
enable our brains to better match the rich experiences and diverse 
envitonments we humans inhabit. A long childhood is also the 
foundation of our mind and sense of self — those amorphous 
mental attributes that make each of us the devastatingly 
charming, adaptable and distinctive individuals we are.”’ 
Young brains are plastic brains 
Brain architecture is refined during periods of intense 
development known as critical periods. Most occur in infancy, 
but some arrive as late as the teenage years. During critical 
periods, brains rapidly develop abilities such as vision, language 
and social skills. Experience in the form of sensory input — 
vision, sound and so on — is required to form new synapses, 
strengthen existing connections, prune superfluous dendrites, 
and add more myelin when faster communication is required. 
Critical periods are when the brain not only uses but absolutely 
requires particular experiences to remodel and refine the rough 
draft circuits. The absence of the appropriate input during 
critical periods can be dire. 
Consider children born with ‘squint’ (strabismus), a 
condition where the eyes do not look in the same direction. 
Normal development of depth perception requires both the 
left and right eye to work together in the first few months of 
life. Children with squint lack depth perception — they can’t 
see in three dimensions or figure out how far away objects are. 


[PDF page 59]

CHILDHOOD 47 
Usually a squint self-cortects or is easily treated by wearing 
an eye-patch overt the good eye. But if it persists or is left 
untreated, children can develop lazy eye (amblyopia), which is 
when the brain starts to ignore input from one of the eyes to 
avoid double vision. The earlier that treatment for squint starts 
the better, and there comes a point when the critical period 
for developing binocular vision closes (around age ten) and it 
becomes too late and too hard to treat. 
Our adult brains are still capable of being changed by 
experience, but the effort required to change is greater. If you’ve 
recently tried to learf a musical instrument or language for the 
first time you'll be able to attest that learning is not impossible, 
but it is never as effortless as it would have been in childhood. 
This is for two reasons: critical periods have closed, and our 
overall capacity for brain plasticity is dialled down. 
Opening and closing sensitive periods 
Harvard neuroscientist Takao Hensch is curious about how and 
why plasticity waxes and wanes with age, and spends his time 
exploring the neural mechanisms responsible for the opening 
and closing of critical periods. He likens brain activity before 
the opening of a critical period to people in a concert hall 
all talking at once — noisy, unstructured and chaotic. It is only 
when the curtain opens that some semblance of structure is 
imposed on the haphazard chatter. 
Hensch has found that two processes regulate critical 
period timing and ‘calm the chattering crowd’: development 
of neurons containing the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA 
and molecular ‘brakes’. Hensch is now busy working out how 
to control the timing of GABAergic inhibition and braking in 
an effort to turn back the biological clock and reopen critical 
periods to cortect early developmental problems.**” 


[PDF page 60]

48 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Why have critical periods evolved? Why does the potential 
for plasticity dial down as we get older? You'd imagine it would 
be more beneficial to retain the infinite capacity for change in 
response to experience as we age. ‘I’his might enable us to have 
unlimited potential to master new skills with ease, or overcome 
early childhood stress and trauma. 
Most scholars agree it would be maladaptive to allow 
experience to trigger large-scale reorganisation in adult brains 
once skills have been learned and behaviours established. 
Our brains must ‘stabilise’ and start the job of processing 
the world around us instead of being continually modified 
by it. Hensch is cautious about the implications of reopening 
critical periods because an individual’s basic identity is also 
shaped during these formative times. “The earliest memories 
and experiences ate essential in shaping character — and they 
profoundly influence everything that comes next,’ he says. ‘If 
rekindling plasticity is not undertaken with the utmost care, 
the rewiring of the brain could threaten to undermine one’s 
sense of self.’*° 
Language acquisition in children — 
from universalist to specialist 
Now we've peered down the lens of the microscope at what’s 
happened to the brain during critical periods, let’s zoom right 
out again and explore what happens to the human owners of 
developing brains. Of all the formative periods of intense 
learning and brain plasticity, human language is probably the 
easiest to conceptualise. 
Babies learn language in two broad phases: first they 
understand words, then they speak. Babies begin babbling at 
around three months and start saying their first words around 
the age of one. By the time they’te two they can say up to 


[PDF page 61]

CHILDHOOD 49 
fifty words, easily understand hundreds more and by three 
they’re able to use over 1000 words with adult-like sentence 
structure. This universal process of language acquisition occurs 
in all cultures and languages, which indicates its strongly 
neurobiological roots. 
After puberty, we can still learn to understand and speak 
languages in addition to our native tongue, but it doesn’t happen 
effortlessly. Unless we learn a language before puberty, we’ll 
never be fully fluent or speak without an accent. This is because 
language is a skill best learned during a period of development 
when the language centres of the brain are most plastic. 
The first year 1s a critical period for language acquisition, but 
it’s worth pointing out that babies can hear what is happening 
from inside the womb by about the twenty-fourth to twenty- 
eighth week of gestation. Support for this comes from research 
showing that newborns display a slight preference for their 
mother’s voice and for the language they hear in utero. Of 
coutse, babies ate immersed in amniotic fluid and any sounds 
must be transmitted via the uterine wall, so what they hear is 
very muffled. Rather than learning any words, it’s thought they 
get a sense of prosody or the patterns and rhythms of their 
mothet’s speech.*! 
If you were raising babies back in the mid 1990s, you might 
have come across the notion that playing classical music while 
yout child was in utero would turn them into gentuses or at 
least guarantee a place at an Ivy League college. This was based 
on the reseatch that babies could heat and respond to music in 
the womb. Clearly some parents thought there was no point 
in foetuses wasting time floating round in amniotic fluid when 
they could get a head start on their education. 
There is no compelling evidence for the so-called Mozart 
Effect (and no evidence of harm, except to bank accounts), yet 


[PDF page 62]

50 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
the idea is catchy and there remains a market for prenatal music 
lessons and equipment. One device I came upon when browsing 
online is the Babypod, ‘an intra-vaginal speaker designed to 
broadcast music inside the womb to an unborn baby’. Hmmm. 
Whether they’ve heard vaginally broadcast symphonies ot 
simply been soothed more naturally by their mother’s muffled 
voice, all babies are born as ‘citizens of the world’ or ‘language 
untversalists’. 
Patricia Kuhl, a professor of speech and hearing science at 
the University of Washington, coined these phrases and her 
reseatch shows that babies in every corner of the globe are 
totally equivalent in their ability to discriminate all the sounds 
of all languages at birth. Adults and older children can’t do this. 
By our first birthday we become ‘culture-bound listeners’ and 
can only discriminate the sounds of our native language, and 
not those of foreign tongues.” 
Take, for example, the language development in a baby 
born in Tokyo versus a baby born in London. At birth, both 
ate language universalists, but their parents are likely ‘culture- 
bound’. Native Japanese-speaking parents will find it hard to 
distinguish between r and / sounds; both sounds are perceived 
as r. If the Japanese and English infants were tested at six months 
of age, both babies could easily distinguish between r and / 
but by ten months of age the Japanese infants would lose the 
distinction because they don’t hear those sounds spoken during 
this sensitive phase. Similarly, Spanish speakers distinguish 
between the words pano and bano, whereas English speakers treat 
the p and b sounds of these words the same. 
Given that many languages use identical sounds, infants 
must learn how to take meaning 1n from language. During the 
first year of life the ‘universalist’ infant becomes specialised 
and ‘tunes in’ to theit native frequency. The pattern follows 


[PDF page 63]

CHILDHOOD 51 
for bilingual babies too — they simply become tuned in to the 
sounds of two different languages. 
Children don’t learn language by sitting down and 
memorising vocab lists and rules of grammar. Learning doesn’t 
require formal teaching or effort, but it does require warm, 
engaged adults who actively talk and engage with the baby. 
If you talk to a baby you'll find you automatically use a higher 
pitch, slow your tempo, exaggerate your intonation and facial 
I do” Babies prefer listening to this type of speech; they don’t 
want or need to be spoken to as adults. This type of interaction 
has been called ‘motherese’ (although the term ‘parent-ese’ is 
rightfully being used, as fathers do it too) or ‘serve and return’ 
learning. Similar to a game of ping-pong, adults and children 
interact by cooing, babbling, making facial expressions, and 
chattering back and forth. 
Deprivation during the first year — 
a critical period for language 
‘Two groups of children have shown us this absolute requirement 
for the language critical period: children who are born deaf, and 
those who grow up in isolation or deprivation without ‘serve 
and return’ interactions.” 
Being born deaf in the days before hearing aids, cochlear 
implants and newborn screening meant growing up with severe 
learning difficulties. Deaf children struggled with vocabulary, 
grammar and syntax (the set of rules, principles and processes 
that govern the sentence structure, such as the order of words). 
Deaf children also lacked the non-verbal aspects of conversation 
such as turn-taking, asking for clarification, eye contact and 
greetings. They had trouble learning to read, and struggled with 
maths and other higher-order cognitive skills. Around eight 


[PDF page 64]

52 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
months is the end of the critical period in which a hearing device 
has to be fitted for deaf children to develop similar cognitive 
skills as their hearing playmates.” 
Interestingly, deaf children who are exposed to sign 
language (often because they’te born to deaf parents) don’t 
develop the same learning problems. Sign language is thought 
to be their ‘native tongue’ and deaf babies are even seen 
‘babbling’ with their hands as early as six months. 
Readers will be familiar with the horrors reported in Romania 
in the late 1980s following the fall of Romania’s Communist 
dictator Nicolae Ceausescu. Thousands of children were found 
abandoned in-orphanages not only half starved but socially 
and emotionally deprived. British families adopted many of 
these orphans and their outcomes have since been tracked 
and compared with adoptees from within the UK who didn’t 
experience deprivation. In 2017 a landmark research paper was 
published in The Lancet describing 165 adoptees who are now in 
their mid to late twenties.” 
Compared to the British-adoptee control group, more 
Romanian adoptees experienced low educational achievement and 
unemployment, and were far more likely to seek help from mental 
health services; many were diagnosed with depression and anxiety, 
which emerged during their teenage years. They had problems 
with attention, disinhibited social engagement and symptoms of 
autism. One protective element appears to be spending less than 
six months in orphanages — these adults were no different from 
UK adoptees. The authors concluded ‘severe adversity, occurring 
because of institutional deprivation 1n early childhood, can have 
a profound and lasting psychological impact despite subsequent 
environmental enrichment in well-resourced and supportive 
families.’ We now understand warm nurturing relationships in 
infancy ate absolutely critical for healthy brain development. 


[PDF page 65]

CHILDHOOD 53 
Toxic stress in childhood leaves 
lasting effects on the brain 
‘It’s possible we’ve underestimated the importance of 
childhood, says Professor Richie Poulton, head of the Dunedin 
Study, a research program that has closely tracked every aspect 
of the lives of 1037 people born in Dunedin, New Zealand in 
1972 and 1973. 
Early life experiences shape developing brain architecture 
and strongly affect whether children grow up to be healthy, 
productive members of society. During early childhood, 
enhanced brain plasticity is a double-edged sword: increased 
opportunity for learning is paired with increased vulnerability 
to deprivation and stress. Toxic stress 1s defined as stress that 
is extreme or long lasting or occurs outside an environment 
of supportive, attached caregiver relationships. Toxic stress 
derails brain development, with damaging effects on learning, 
behaviour, and physical and mental health across the lifespan.” 
This vulnerability 1s clearly demonstrated by the Dunedin Study. 
Poulton has been able to predict with reasonable accuracy 
which children will grow up with social or health problems. 
Growing up in a socioeconomically deprived family, exposure 
to maltreatment, low IQ and poor self-control are proven 
ptedictors of poor adult health and social outcomes including 
criminal convictions, prescription fills, welfare claims and 
hospital visits. This ‘high cost’ group of adults could be 
reliably identified by three years of age. Rather than blaming 
the victim for economic burden following on from childhood 
disadvantage, Poulton suggests we focus on early-years 
intervention or what he calls ‘grey-matter infrastructure’ so we 
can lift health and social wellbeing as disadvantaged children 
grow up.”° 


[PDF page 66]

54 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Another ‘natural-experiment’ — the 
Christchurch earthquakes 
Another group of children living a few hours north of Dunedin 
in New Zealand have given us additional insights into how 
extreme stress in infancy impacts social, emotional and cognitive 
development in childhood. 
Starting in September 2010, my hometown of Christchurch 
was hit by a series of massive earthquakes. The most devastating 
was on 22 February 2011, when 185 people died and 6600 
people were injured. Everyone, including my family, was deeply 
affected. Over flte next two years there were 14 000 aftershocks, 
including thirty-two earthquakes over magnitude five. Friends 
of mine took to playing ‘guess the size’ on Facebook, and many 
wete able to determine the fault line and magnitude within 
decimal-point accuracy. People called living with continual 
shaking, damaged infrastructure, insurance battles and 
unrelenting psychological stress ‘the new normal. 
In the past few years I’ve started hearing stories of Christchurch 
schools struggling with large numbers of children starting school 
with learning difficulties and behavioural problems. For example, 
I knew of one class of twenty-two children that required four 
extra learning support teachers. here was a general consensus 
among my friends and family this was the impact of children 
growing up in ‘the new normal’. 
In much the same way the Montreal Ice Storm babies have 
been tracked, a cohort of Christchurch children are now being 
followed by researcher Kathleen Liberty, an associate professor 
of child development at the University of Canterbury. I met 
with Liberty in her office just after Christmas 2016 to discuss 
what she calls her ‘post-EQ children’. 


[PDF page 67]

CHILDHOOD 55 
In New Zealand, children begin school on the day of or near 
to their fifth birthday, and Liberty has been gathering data on 
the social, emotional and cognitive development of these new 
entrants since 2006. After the earthquakes she has been able to 
revisit the same primary schools and gather data on post-EQ 
children then compare them to the ‘old normal’ baseline. 
Liberty confirms there ate significantly more behavioural 
problems and post-traumatic stress symptoms in the children 
who started school after experiencing the earthquakes. In her 
2016 paper, published in PLOS Natural Disasters, she reports 
twenty-one per cent’ of post-EQ children showed six or more 
post-traumatic symptoms such as being withdrawn, clingy, 
irritable, defiant, unhappy or having sudden changes of mood 
(six or more symptoms is highly indicative of post-traumatic 
stress disorder, P'TSD, in children). Less than nine per cent of 
pte-EQ children showed as many symptoms.” 
One of the strongest predictors of whether children 
would experience difficulties was the age the child was 
when the earthquakes began. Surprisingly, children younger 
than two when the sequence began were more vulnerable than 
older children. But Liberty suggests this is because the older 
children experienced a buffer period of normal stress-free 
brain development. She guesses older children possessed the 
behaviouts, language and cognitive skills to communicate with 
parents and perhaps make some sense of what was happening 
when the room was shaking, people were screaming and the 
world was literally falling down around them. 
Because earthquakes strike without warning, the post-EQ 
boys and girls have grown up 1n an unpredictable world, many 
in highly stressed families. During a period of incredible 
neutal plasticity, the children’s stress response systems were 
activated thousands of times. Exposure to extreme stress 


[PDF page 68]

56 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
before the age of two activates the immature stress response 
system including the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) 
axis and brain regions that regulate its activity, with enduring 
consequences for children’s behaviour.” 
You'll no doubt be wondering if there were sex differences 
in how children reacted to the quakes. Liberty told me that sex 
differences weren’t detected. Primary-school-age boys and girls 
were equally affected by growing up with earthquake stress. 
However, a study of 525 Christchurch teenagers six months 
after the earthquakes reported clear sex differences in the 
development of PTSD. Only thirteen per cent of boys showed 
clinically significant PTSD symptoms compared to thirty-four 
per cent of teenage girls. This finding is consistent with other 
disaster zone research and PTSD research in general that finds 
higher prevalence of PTSD amongst post-pubertal girls and 
women compared to boys and men.” 
Intriguingly, one of the buffers against distress was being part 
of a Maori community. Other researchers have also found the 
social connectedness, spiritual support and collective dynamics 
associated within the indigenous community contributed to the 
resilience of the Maori children in Christchurch.”! 
Liberty tells me she is now working with schools and 
families to help children learn to regulate and understand their 
own emotions and to build resilience. One myth she is working 
hard to dispel is that parents, in particular the mother, are 
to blame for how resilient or stressed children are. “Children 
are not having problems because of how Mum reacts during 
an earthquake,’ she says. “Mothers don’t cause the problems. 
The earthquakes did, she said. “But parents are in a unique 
position to teach their children how to manage their stress 
response.’ 


[PDF page 69]

CHILDHOOD 57 
Are resilient children born or made? 
In every study I’ve described, including the Ice Storm babies 
and the Dunedin Study, a proportion of each cohort displayed 
exceptional resilience and flourished despite the circumstances. 
Nearly thirty per cent of the post-EQ children in Christchurch 
showed no symptoms of post-traumatic sttess. One in 
five Romanian orphans are completely unaffected by their 
maltreatment. These resilient children are the ones who can 
give us unique insights into opportunities for early-years ‘grey- 
matter infrastructure’ support and intervention. 
It’s important to consider stress and resilience from a 
bottom-up, outside-in, top-down perspective. Family ties and 
psychological coping mechanisms strengthen resilience, but 
resilience also has biological roots. 
All children differ in their biological susceptibility to life 
experiences in a ‘for better and for worse’ manner. Some kids 
ate particularly sensitive to both highly stressful and highly 
nurturing environments. Like orchids, such children bloom if 
lovingly cultivated, but wilt and wither if neglected. In contrast, 
adaptable resilient children who don’t get easily stressed are like 
little dandelions: they'll grow and thrive anywhere. Studies are 
now showing that ‘orchid’ genes linked to particular enzymes 
ot brain chemical receptors, if and only if combined with early 
childhood toxic stress, can trigger behavioural problems and 
mood disorders later in life. We'll come back to this intriguing 
concept in chapter 6 when we look at mental health. 
Experiences of gender 
Because experiences build the brain, we can’t consider female 
brain development without reflecting on the experiences of 


[PDF page 70]

58 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
girlhood. As Cordelia Fine has pointed out, society places 
considerable weight on biological sex, and gender socialisation of 
boys and girls starts at birth. Life-long brain plasticity has been 
demonstrated in response to experiences as varied as learning 
language and music, emotional regulation, taxi driving and even 
juggling. There is little doubt early childhood experiences of 
what it means to be a girl will also make an impression on brain 
architecture. 
Boys and girls go out to play 
Walking through my sons’ primary school, I can very nearly 
divide the senior playground in half by gender. In one half, 
roaming herds of nine-, ten-, and eleven-year-old same-sex peers 
play competitive ball games replete with complex rules that are 
debated and challenged constantly for ‘fairness’. Wandering 
between the ball games are same-sex clusters of twos or threes 
chatting, whispering and peeling off to regularly seek approval 
of intervention from a teacher. If you’ve ever observed primary 
school children left to their own devices, you'll have no trouble 
guessing which group is gitls and which is boys. 
?’m a mother of two boys in the roaming herd, but my 
memories of girlhood are clear. I rarely roamed with the ball- 
chasing herd; rather, I spent my time whispering secrets, forming 
and breaking alliances, and giggling with my girlfriends till I 
neatly wet my pants. And according to my mother, I regularly 
reported in to her about who was saying what to whom and why 
they shouldn’t and what I'd like her to do about it. 
Highly respected gender researcher Professor Melissa Hines, 
Director of the Gender Development Research Centre at the 
University of Cambridge, has summarised the differences in play 
shown by boys and girls during childhood.” Hines claims that 
long before children reach school age it is possible to predict 


[PDF page 71]

CHILDHOOD 59 
with a reasonable degree of certainty who is a boy and who is 
a gitl by the toys they choose and the friends they play with. 
(That d-value statistic I introduced you to in the introduction is 
around 0.80 for toy choice and playmate preference.)” 
Between the ages of one and two, children are very flexible 
in their thinking about gender — a little girl might firmly 
believe she’ll grow up to be a man like Dad, she’ll happily play 
with boys and girls, and won’t show a strong preference for 
‘gitls toys’. By about age two children become very motivated 
to relate to other members of their ‘group’, girls with girls, boys 
with boys, and they often become very strict about adhering to 
gender stereotypes: ‘Girls are princesses who wear pink’ is 
the classic example. (I remember being mystified when at the 
same age my eldest son would refuse to even let me dry him 
with a pink towel after his bath. Now I understand this was 
developmentally normal!) Despite the best attempts at gender- 
neutral parenting, parents report that girls will often prefer 
to play with dolls and boys will prefer to play with cars and 
weapons. Groups of boys or brothers are also more likely to 
play ‘cough-and-tumble’ physical games. 
Gender difference in play and friend preference is seen across 
cultures and continues into the school years, although girls tend 
to relent a little and will happily choose more traditional ‘boy 
toys’ such as Lego if playing alone. Boys, on the other hand, 
only get more stringent in their choices (this is thought to be 
because of the pressures some of them face to be ‘little men’). 
There are two broad theories explaining these sex differences 
in toy preference, playmate choice and play style: nature and 
nurture (surprised?). Many people feel uncomfortable looking at 
the biological roots of gender, and as Margaret McCarthy notes 
it is the ‘collision of gender and biology that generates the most 
heat in the debate about the female brain’. 


[PDF page 72]

60 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Hormones and the ‘mini puberty’ of infancy 
Boys and girls do differ a tiny bit during infancy. The average 
newborn gitl is ever so slightly smaller, less fussy, easier to soothe 
and more socially awate than the average boy. Her language, 
memory and motor skills also track slightly ahead during the 
first year. Part of this may be due to the effects of testosterone 
early in gestation that masculinise or feminise certain regions of 
the brain.’ Another reason may be ‘mini puberty’. Technically 
it’s called the ‘postnatal endocrine surge’ but, like ‘puberty 
proper’, it’s when testosterone and oestrogen are released from 
testes and ovaries. 
The hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis develops and 
is active during the first half of pregnancy. During the second half 
of pregnancy, hormones from the placenta switch the axis into 
silent mode. In girls, once the effects of placental and maternal 
hormones have worn off the axis brake is released and it jolts 
into action for a while. A week or so after birth the ovaries start 
manufacturing oestrogen, causing slight swelling of the breasts 
and growth of the uterus. In infant boys testosterone causes penis 
and testes growth, and sebaceous gland and acne development.” 
Mini-puberty is complete by the age of two and the HPG 
axis stays quiet till ‘puberty proper’. What this means in terms 
of brain development is unknown; however, neuroscientist 
Lise Eliot, author of Pink Brain, Blue Brain, speculates that just 
as prenatal hormones organise the brain, the postnatal surge in 
hormones might create a critical period for nudging infant brain 
development further down the male or femaie trajectory." 
One clue that hormones influence toy and playmate choice 
comes ftom studies of non-human primates. Given the large 
effects of cultural and societal expectations on human children, 
ptimates are important model species for investigating the 


[PDF page 73]

CHILDHOOD 61 
biology of sex differences. In a review for the Journal of Neuroscience 
Research, Elizabeth Lonsdorf summarises sex differences in 
ptimates that echo differences found in human children. 
She points out that male primates spend more time in ‘rough- 
and-tumble’ play, and they roam further from their mothers than 
their sisters do. Females groom others more than males in the 
first year of life, and perform a specific behaviour called ‘stick 
carrying, in which a stick is cradled and carried in a form of 
play mothering. Lonsdorf concludes that gender socialisation 
in humans magnifies the differences between boys and girls, 
but primate studies ‘suggest ‘these behavioral sex differences are 
rooted in our biological and evolutionary heritage’. 
Gender stereotypes begin before birth 
‘Cars and trucks or ribbons and bows. What are we having? 
We’re about to know!’ 
Thanks to technology we no longer need to wait until the 
bub arrives to deploy colour-coded gender stereotyping. It can 
begin in the womb. In a trend unique to the social media age, 
gender-reveal parties are now a ‘thing’. For the uninitiated 
reader, patents-to-be host gender-reveal parties for friends and 
family with the purpose of announcing whether they’re having 
a baby boy or girl, and the parties take place months before the 
baby is born. 
A scroll through Pinterest shows some very creative ways 
to announce whether the unborn babe is a boy or girl. The 
most popular methods seem to be encouraging guests to 
simultaneously bite into pink or blue cupcakes covered in 
gender-neutral icing, opening giant boxes filled with pink or 
blue helium balloons, or smashing open pinatas filled with pink 
ot blue confetti. Beforehand, guests ate invited to bet on the 
outcome, or cast a vote for “Team Pink’ or “Team Blue’. 


[PDF page 74]

62 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Because ‘gender disappointment’ is real, I hate to think 
what happens if the cut cake isn’t the desired shade of pastel. 
Do mothers hoping for a little girl but faced with a box of blue 
balloons hide their grief till their guests go homer 
Clearly ’'m cynical about this trend. And I’m not the only 
one. Many feminists have expressed concern that gender- 
reveal parties are, by default, celebrating and reinforcing gender 
stereotypes for the unborn child. 
Whether they intend to or not, parents respond to baby boys 
and baby girls differently, including in utero. Mothers who know 
they’re carrying a baby boy will claim their boy’s movements to 
be far mote active or vigorous compared to mothers carrying 
gitls. Studies of whether foetal movement can predict sex 
are contradictory. One careful study from the Netherlands 
monitored 123 women, fifty-six of whom were carrying baby 
boys and sixty-seven baby girls. Foetal movements, heart 
rate and heart rate variability were assessed, and researchers 
concluded there were no sex differences in movement.” 
Once babies ate born all bets are off, and even those parents 
who swear they’re raising their children 1n a gender-neutral 
manner find it hard to be ‘neutral’ all the time. Kor example, 
mothers of daughters use more ‘emotion’ words than mothers of 
sons (e.g. ‘love’, ‘scared’, ‘worried’, ‘pleased’, ‘cross’, etc.). By the 
time the daughters start talking they use more emotion words 
than their brothers.” 
Lise Eliot posits that boys and girls enter the world with 
slight differences and how parents react to those differences 
(based on unconscious biases or explicit beliefs) contribute to 
what can grow into troublesome gaps. ‘Some parents maintain 
traditional gender stereotypes and expectations, she says. This 
may ‘nurture’ the ‘nature’, so to speak." 


[PDF page 75]

CHILDHOOD 63 
It’s-easy to forget that parents aren’t the only social influence 
on children. As discussed above, the primary schoolyard is fairly 
segtegated down gender lines. Researchers theorise that the 
‘self-imposed segregation’ may cause children to develop two 
cultures, each with different norms for interaction. Within these 
boy or girl groupings, children self-socialise and reinforce ideas 
about how boys and girls should play, react and speak. Together 
children ‘practise’ gendered behaviours. As a result girls become 
mote ‘girl-like’ and boys more ‘boy-like’.** 
Why do expectations of gender matter? 
For some reason, our obsession with sex differences is 
particularly pervasive when it comes to educating our children. 
Neurobiologist Donna Maney has compiled a list of claims 
commonly presented to teachers in professional development 
workshops in the USA. 
Some of the spurious claims include ‘the female brain is more 
active than the male brain, which often goes into a pause state 
after tasks. To break the pause, boys must use loud voices, run 
or jump, and ‘boys have less oxytocin than girls, which makes 
them uncomfortable with eye contact, so they should be seated 
side-by-side’. 
One boys’ high school website claims that boys have less 
serotonin in their brains than girls, which means they are more 
likely to act impulsively and be less able to sit still for long periods 
of time. You’d be forgiven for thinking it was time to reclassify 
both serotonin and oxytocin as classroom seating-plan chemicals! 
Why does it matter if parents and teachers have expectations 
of gender? 
It matters deeply if expectations become stereotypes. Gender 
stereotypes refer to particular attributes believed to characterise 
boys or girls as separate groups (e.g. girls can sit still, boys 


[PDF page 76]

64 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
can’t). Stereotypes inherently ignore within-group differences 
(some girls can’t sit still, and some boys are great at sitting) and 
exaggerate between-group differences. 
Around the world men believe they are smarter and more 
brilliant than women. A study of twelve countries, including 
Australia, Britain and the US, published in the Brétish Journal 
of Psychology, found ‘male hubris’ and ‘female humility’ in 
self-estimates of intelligence (which weren’t aligned with 
actual IQ).° 
This destructive gender stereotype emerges in childhood. 
A study published in Sezence in 2017 found that six-year-old 
gitls have already absorbed gendered beliefs about intelligence 
despite there being exactly zero difference in academic ability. 
Girls believe ‘brilliance, giftedness and gentus’ are male 
qualities. In the study, little girls were less interested in games 
they perceived as meant for ‘really, really smart kids’. They 
went from being enthusiastic about playing ‘smart-kid’ games 
at ages four and five to saying, “This isn’t the game for me, 
around age six. Boys of the same age didn’t hold the same 
beliefs. It gets worse: the six-year-old girls happily grouped 
boys into the “children who are really, really smart’ category, 
but not their own gender.” 
What do growing brains need to thrive? 
It seems like Pve spent much of this chapter exploring what can 
go wrong during childhood — from the effects of toxic stress to 
learning negative gender stereotypes. If you have young children 
you're probably ready to drop the book and run off to bulk- 
buy cotton wool and bubble wrap. Given what we know about 
normal and abnormal brain development, what experiences do 
infants and children (the dandelions and the orchids) need to 


[PDF page 77]

CHILDHOOD 65 
thrive, not just surviver What can adults who raise children do 
to foster healthy, happy brains? 
Faced with wading through more childhood development 
literature in search of an answer, I instead picked up the phone 
and called my friend and colleague Dr Kristy Goodwin. 
Goodwin is a children’s learning and development researcher 
and she has summarised seven essential experiences or, as she 
calls them, “building blocks’ for optimal brain development. 
These common-sense building blocks include: 
° Attachments and relationships. Warm, predictable and 
loving relationships allow children to feel secure, safe and 
unstressed. 
Language. Infants and young children need ample 
opportunities to hear and use language: ‘serve-and-return’ 
interactions are crucial. 
Sleep. Sleep is vital for children’s emotional, physical and 
mental development. 
Play. Through play, babies and children develop cognitive 
skills, creativity and emotional regulation. They need 
opportunities to experiment and explore, including time 
outdoors in nature. Goodwin highlights the modern-day 
need to counteract ‘screen time’ with ‘green time’. 
Physical movement. Children need to master simple 
then complex motor skills in order to develop more 
sophisticated, higher-order thinking skills later on. 
Nutrition. Quality nutrition is vital for optimal 
development. Children’s diets need to be rich in foods that 
contain essential fatty acids optimal for brain development. 
Executive function skills. Children need to master simple 
higher-order thinking skills such as impulse control and 
working memory.” 


[PDF page 78]

66 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
‘Given that we know experience accounts for about seventy per 
cent of a child’s development, says Goodwin, ‘it’s critical that 
we provide them with the right types of experiences.’ Goodwin 
and I agree that childhood 1s a very sacred time. It’s a unique 
period in the lifespan that needs to be treasured, nurtured and 
protected. 


[PDF page 79]

Puberty 
PUBERTY IS A RITE OF PASSAGE MOST OF US READING THIS BOOK 
will have passed through. If you’re a woman, maybe you have 
fond memories of shopping for your first bra, and like me 
you were excitedly anticipating the arrival of your first period. 
Or perhaps your transition was full of angst, confusion or 
humuliation. 
As Kaz Cooke writes in Girl Stuff, puberty is when you get 
bigger, fluffier, leakier and moodier. It’s also when the potential 
for embarrassment goes through the roof. I concur with Cooke 
that the capacity for embarrassment crashes back down to earth 
once you enter adulthood. 
Every girl follows her own individual pathway through 
puberty — some grow breasts before pubic hair, others sprout 
underarm hair years before their first period. Some girls start 
maturing eatly, around age eight, progress rapidly and have 
their first period about age ten. Others blossom later and travel 
slowly. 
Puberty isn’t only about the physical changes. It involves the 
beginning of neurodevelopmental, emotional and behavioural 
changes unlike any seen since infancy. As you'll learn, there are 
67 


[PDF page 80]

68 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
other outside-in and top-down elements that influence what 
happens to girls during puberty besides hormones. 
From an evolutionary perspective, puberty 1s all about 
getting the body and brain ready to date, mate and nurture 
offspring. In both boys and girls, it begins with the activation 
of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis, which 
results 1n: 
Q Maturation of gametes (oocytes/eggs in the ovaries of girls, 
spermatozoa in the testes of boys). 
2 Increased levels of sex hormones (ovarian hormones in 
girls; testicular hormones in boys) and adrenal hormones 
(in both boys and girls). 
Q Appearance of secondary sex characteristics 
(breasts etc. in girls; larger penis, testicles and muscles 
in boys). 
Q Fertility (menstrual cycle in girls, ability to ejaculate 
in boys). 
Puberty results in the maturation of a body capable of 
reproduction, but the physical changes of puberty alone aren’t 
enough to fertilise an egg. The phase of adolescence results 
in the maturation of the social, emotional and cognitive skills 
required to ensure the sperm and egg get the chance to meet in 
the first place. 
From a neurobiological perspective, we can think of puberty 
as the second sensitive phase for hormone-driven brain 
development. Alongside prenatal life and infancy, puberty is 
when brain architecture is extra sensitive to sex hormones. I like 
to think of puberty as ‘finishing school’ for the brain. It’s when 
neural circuits laid down in utero and during infancy are refined 
and then activated. 


[PDF page 81]

PUBERTY 69 
Many of the same neural mechanisms involved in early 
development get in on the act again: neurogenesis and the 
elaboration and pruning of synapses and dendrites. 
When considering this two-phase brain development 
concept, keep in mind that during the first wave of hormone- 
dependent sculpting, ovarian hormones played no role in female 
brain development (unlike the male brain, which was sculpted 
by testosterone). Puberty is when ovarian hormones finally 
come to the fore. 
Hormones are only one piece of the puzzle, and a pubertal 
girl’s brain and her thoughts, feelings and behaviours are 
profoundly influenced by the world around her, including 
by gender, culture, education, family environment and 
shifting friendship groups. Her brain continues to experience 
neuroplastic change well into her twenties. 
In this chapter we'll take a look at the neural control of 
puberty, and focus on the earliest stages of adolescence. In the 
next chapter we'll consider the neurobiology of the menstrual 
cycle, and finally in chapter 5 we’ll explore the teenage brain. 
First puberty - 
The tween growth spurt is one of the more obvious and least 
intimate signs of puberty. Breast development (thelarche), 
pubic hair growth (pubarche), armpit hair growth, and the 
attival of monthly periods (menarche) are the others. But 
the first hormonal changes sending a child towards adulthood 
commence far earlier than most people realise, somewhere 
between the ages of six and eight. Adrenarche (yes, another 
arche — pronounced arky and Greek for ‘origins’ or ‘new 
beginnings’) refers to the awakening of the adrenal glands, 
which sit atop the kidneys. 


[PDF page 82]

70 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
The adrenal glands are made up of two parts: the 
adrenal medulla that secretes the hormones adrenaline and 
noradrenaline (known as epinephrine and norepinephrine in the 
US) and the adrenal cortex, which manufactures three types of 
hormones — mineralcorticoids, glucocorticoids and androgens. 
Androgens include testosterone, and the androgen precursor 
molecule dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). Androgens ate 
what we might typically think of as ‘male’ hormones. But girls 
make them too. | 
Normal maturation of the adrenal glands in both boys 
and girls results in development of pubic hair, underarm hair, 
adult body odoyr and the dreaded acne. The mechanisms 
that initiate ‘puberty proper’ — breasts and periods — involve a 
different hormonal cascade, which we’ll get into shortly. This 
means occasionally a healthy girl as young as seven or eight can 
sprout a few pubic hairs or requite deodorant to mask underarm 
odour, but she isn’t necessarily on track to get her period early 
or develop breasts. The early signs of adrenarche don’t indicate 
precocious puberty.” 
Let’s take a closer look at adrenarche, because it’s increasingly 
recognised as an important phase of childhood development. 
Dr Lisa Mundy is the project coordinator of a longitudinal 
study of puberty in Australia, the Childhood to Adolescence 
Transition Study (CATS). CATS is interested in what gives 
children a healthy start to adolescence with a special focus on 
adrenarche.°>* 
Mundy and her team have followed over 1200 children 
from ages eight or nine through adolescence, and at the time 
of writing, some have embarked on their second year of high 
school. The CATS team have overturned the idea that ages 
suttounding adrenarche are a developmentally ‘quiet’ time 
for children, one when we can simply practise benign neglect. 


[PDF page 83]

PUBERTY 71 
Instead, adrenarche has significant implications for children’s 
social and emotional wellbeing long before ‘puberty proper’ 
begins. One of the most surprising findings to emerge from 
Mundy’s research has been the discovery that rising levels of 
adrenal androgens impact emotion and behaviout. In particular, 
early adrenarche is associated with greater tisk of mental health 
symptoms.” High DHEA levels predicted problems, but girls 
and boys respond quite differently. 
‘We looked at DHEA and we found higher levels in boys 
were associated with emotional and behaviour problems, 
Mundy told me. “Ihe same association wasn’t there for girls. 
Instead we found DHEA was linked to social problems with 
their friends.’ 
Child and adolescent psychiatrist Professor George Patton, 
a colleague of Mundy, believes it is time to pay much closer 
attention to the social and emotional development of children 
in these age groups. ‘Benign neglect worked back in the 1950s 
when social structures and communities were in place to 
support kids,’ he told me over the phone. “The world is a lot less 
understandable and predictable than it used to be.’ 
The HPO axis — how the brain 
and body talk puberty 
Popular wisdom would have you think puberty begins in the 
ovaties and a young body suddenly steeped in oestrogen grows 
curvaceous and fecund. Whilst ‘puberty proper’ involves the 
gonads and is called (as you might have guessed) gonadatche, it 
all begins in the brain. 
To understand the neurobiological underpinnings of puberty, 
we need to return to the HPO axis, the trio that unites body 
and brain and orchestrates our reproductive lives. 


[PDF page 84]

T2 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
In brief, the HPO axis works like this: 
2 Hypothalamus signals to the pituitary gland via the 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). 
Q GnRH causes release of luteinising hormone (LH) 
and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). 
Q LH and FSH stimulate the ovaries to release oestrogens and 
progesterone. 
Q Oeéestrogen and progesterone exert their wide-ranging 
effects on the body and brain. 
2 LH, FSH, oestrogen and progesterone signal back to the 
hypothalamus and pituitary, forming complex positive and 
negative feedback loops. 
Awakening the biological clock 
During our fertile years between puberty and menopause GnRH 
is secreted from a pulse generator in the hypothalamus in a 
rhythmic fashion. I like to think of it as the neural manifestation 
of the famed biological clock — “ck-tick-Hick. 
In childhood GnRH is released, but instead of a rhythmic 
tick-tick-tick, the telease is a low, slow and continuous wrrrrr. 
This low-level steady release maintains the HPO axis in a sort 
of ‘hormonal hibernation’, an event unique to humans and 
a few higher-order primates. Hormonal hibernation means 
humans have a prolonged childhood and the requisite phases of 
brain development, socialisation and learning. Mother Nature 
seems to know a little girl is in no way capable of bearing and 
caring for another human, so she makes it impossible for her to 
bring a baby into the world until she’s mature enough to cope. 
Although, it goes without saying, menarche doesn’t necessarily 
indicate she’s ready either! 


[PDF page 85]

PUBERTY 73 
Nomenclature often gives clues about the roles of hormones 
and the job of GnRH in the pituitary is clearly indicated 
by its title — it releases gonadotropin hormones. The two 
main gonadotropins are FSH and LH, and thanks to their 
hypothalamic conductor they too are released in a rhythmic /ck- 
tick-tick from the pituitary. FSH, as the name suggests, stimulates 
the growth of follicles in the ovary, promotes development of 
the egg, and causes secretion of oestradiol (the main type 
of oestrogen). LH is responsible for causing the follicle to 
rupture, triggering ovulation. 
LH and FSH are’ produced in varying amounts throughout 
the lifespan. During childhood levels are low, but at puberty 
LH secretion increases until it surges to reach levels twenty 
to forty times greater than in early girlhood. FSH secretion, 
meanwhile, increases two- to three-fold. FSH won’t overtake 
LH again until after menopause when, unchecked by ageing 
ovaries, both levels skyrocket. 
Because the brain contains oestrogen receptors, oestrogen 
can influence how we think, feel and behave. One striking 
example of this 1s seen at menopause, when fluctuating levels 
of ovarian hormones cause hot flashes, night sweats, mood 
swings and forgetfulness. Once hormones level out in the 
yeats after a woman’s last menstrual period, the symptoms 
disappear too. 
Progesterone is another hormone produced by the ovaries, 
more specifically in the corpus luteum, which develops from 
the follicle after it bursts, releasing the egg at ovulation. 
Progesterone and oestrogen work synergistically. For example, 
pubertal breast development requires oestrogen to prime the 
cells and progesterone causes cell differentiation and growth. 
There aren’t as many teceptors for progesterone in the brain 
as there are for oestrogens, but it’s becoming clearer it too can 


[PDF page 86]

74 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
regulate thinking, mood and neuroplasticity, and may even play 
a role in recovery from brain injury. 
Awakening the clock with a genetic KISS 
What exactly awakens the GnRH biological clock? Is there an 
internal calendar marking the years? Or are there ‘outside-in’ 
elements that influence the timing of puberty, such as nutrition, 
the environment or family dynamics? 
Genes largely determine when a girl will start to blossom. 
We surmise this is because girls, their mothers and sisters all 
experience menarche at around the same age. Studies have 
shown heritabihty ranges from fifty per cent to eighty per cent. 
After reading this statistic, 1 Skyped my mum to find out how 
old she was when she got her first period. She remembers being 
about twelve and half — the same as me. My sister texted that 
she was a week shy of twelve. Puberty timing in mothers ts also 
reflected in the timing of onset of puberty in their sons.” 
The gene responsible for awakening GnRH neurons 1s the 
rather whimsically named KISS-1, which is expressed in a small 
cluster of neurons in the pulse generator of the hypothalamus. 
KISS-1 codes for a protein called kisspeptin, which is released 
from neurons with two other peptide hormones, neurokinin B 
and dynorphin; the trio ate popularly referred to as KNDy 
(pronounced ‘candy’). 
There is a story behind these sweet-sounding names. 
KISS-1 was discovered by Danny Welch, a melanoma 
researcher, when he was working at Penn State College of 
Medicine in the town of Hershey. He named the new gene 
KISS-1 in honour of the Hershey’s Kisses made at the town’s 
famous chocolate factory. 
No-one had any idea KISS-1 was involved in puberty until 
an unusual family approached reproductive endocrinologist 


[PDF page 87]

PUBERTY 75 
Stephanie Seminara, who runs the Reproductive Endocrine 
Unit at Massachusetts General Hospital. In the early 2000s 
a large family in which three marriages were between first 
cousins came to Seminara’s clinic hoping for treatment. There 
were nineteen children in the family and of these six (four men 
and two women) suffered from a form of abnormal puberty 
called idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH). 
THH is characterised by abnormal or absent GnRH pulses, 
so puberty doesn’t start. It’s rare, but the disorder provided 
Seminara’s team a unique opportunity to look at the control 
of GnRH in humans. The family underwent genetic testing, 
and it was found that the gene for the kisspeptin receptor was 
mutated. This meant kisspeptin couldn’t act on GnRH neurons 
to switch on puberty.”! 
Although Seminara didn’t know it at the time, a group from 
the INSERM in Paris used a similar approach in another IHH 
family. In this instance, a twenty-year-old man was teferred to 
Nicholas de Roux’s clinic with symptoms of delayed puberty. 
He had an abnormally small penis and testes, short stature 
and sparse pubic hair. It turned out that three of his four 
brothers had similar traits; and one of his sisters, who was 
sixteen, had partially developed breasts and had only ever had 
one period. Their parents were first cousins who progressed 
normally through puberty and were clearly fertile. Again, 
genetic screening revealed that the receptor for kisspeptin was 
faulty.” hanks to these families, kisspeptin’s pivotal role in the 
neuroendocrine control of reproduction was established. Since 
its discovery, roles for kisspeptin have been found for ovulation, 
embryo implantation, development of the placenta, pregnancy 
and childbirth, and in 2017 it was implicated in menopausal hot 
flashes. 


[PDF page 88]

76 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Ils puberty starting at younger ages? 
IHH and delayed puberty are relatively rare, but it seems like 
we're all getting more familiar with stories about early puberty. 
No-one is comfortable hearing about five-year-old girls 
shopping for a bra, or learning to manage a period at the same 
time as navigating kindergarten. Of course, the media hypes 
the stories and they’re often told in the same breath as stories 
of nineteenth-century girls not starting their periods until they 
were seventeen. 
Are the girls .of today really starting puberty nearly a decade 
younger than previous centuries, and even earlier than girls 
in the 1960s? My GP said she’s convinced this is the case, and 
so were plenty of other experts I spoke to. But there are some 
nuances to the story. 
Girls ate reaching puberty earlier than they used to, 
confirms Jayashri Kulkarni, a professor of psychiatry at Monash 
University. ‘But while it’s true that girls are experiencing some 
pubertal changes earlier on — developing breasts, for instance — 
the actual age they get their first period has actually stabilised at 
around thirteen years, she explains. Data from the US confirms 
this: girls are getting their first period on average four to six 
months younger than girls did in previous centuries. But they 
are developing breasts up to two years earlier. 
Marcia Herman-Giddens, an adjunct professor and 
paediatrician at the University of North Carolina, first recorded 
this finding. In the 80s and 90s she was seeing more and mote girls 
coming to her clinic with signs of early puberty. This observation 
worried her, so she coordinated a number of nationwide studies 
looking at the average ages gitls began puberty and compared 
the timing to previous generations. 


[PDF page 89]

PUBERTY 77 
Her initial finding was that the average age for the onset 
of breast development was eight years and nine months for 
African American girls, nine years three months for Hispanic 
gitls, and nine years eight months for Caucasian and Asian 
American girls. Subsequent studies in the United States 
confirmed that today’s girls are developing breasts earlier than 
in previous generations.” The same pattern is seen in Europe. 
The Copenhagen Puberty Study found that the estimated mean 
age for breast development decreased from 10.9 in 1991 to 9.9 
years 1n 2006, but the average age for menarche didn’t change. 
It’s important to distinguish between a girl who simply starts 
developing earlier than her friends and a girl with a medical 
condition. ‘True precocious puberty includes girls who have known 
neuroendocrine disorders or brain tumours (about twenty pet. 
cent of cases). These girls may show signs of puberty at ages three 
or four. In contrast, ear/y-but-normal puberty includes healthy girls 
whose development simply falls to the far left of the bell curve.” 
True central precocious puberty is relatively rare and has its 
roots in the brain (the term ‘central’ meaning central nervous 
system or brain). In some cases it is caused by the GnRH pulse 
generator switching on far too early, and if the cause isn’t a brain 
tumour the main treatment involves drugs to block the action 
of GnRH. 
Defining the normal bell curve has been a moving target for 
the medical community. As you can imagine, continual shifts 
of what is deemed ‘early-but-normal’ provoke debate, confusion 
and misinformation for parents. Girls who start puberty early 
don’t necessarily have a medical problem that needs treatment. 
What are the causes of early-but-normal puberty? 
Child health has improved considerably since the 1800s. Modern 
medicine and improved nutrition probably account for some of 


[PDF page 90]

78 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
the shift from menarche occurring in the mid to late teens in 
the nineteenth century, to around ages eleven or twelve in the 
gitls of the 1960s. However, the current early-but-normal breast 
development trend of the last couple of decades remains puzzling. 
There are numerous theories for the shifting bell curve. The 
three most well-studied culprits are being overweight, exposure 
to environmental chemicals that disrupt hormones, and social 
and psychological stress in early childhood. 
Danish studies have concluded that the heavier girls are at 
age seven, the earlier they enter puberty. Obese children have 
higher than average levels of a hormone called leptin which 
stimulates the GnRH in the hypothalamus. But, irrespective of 
BMI at age seven, there is still a downward trend in the age at 
which children enter puberty, so obesity isn’t the lone culprit. 
Endocrine disruptors are chemicals that may interact 
with or disrupt our hormones. Some are naturally occurring, 
such as soy, and others are manufactured. One of the most 
extensively studied chemicals is the plastic Bisphenol A (BPA), 
once commonly used in baby bottles, but now banned in many 
countries. The net result of exposure to endocrine disrupters is 
difficult to predict. But some researchers have commented that 
they may well be changing girls’ hormonal milieu, and in turn 
how girls’ bodies respond to oestrogen.” 
History supports the ‘early childhood stress’ theory. Finnish 
gitls evacuated from Helsinki during World War II, girls who 
survived Hurricane Katrina, and even some of the Project 
Ice Storm girls entered puberty earlier than expected. While 
the Christchurch earthquake cohort are still too young to 
be experiencing puberty, Kathleen Liberty says she will be 
monitoring those girls over the next few years. 
The CATS team found that children who go through early 
puberty show signs of disruptive behaviour and emotional 


[PDF page 91]

PUBERTY 79 
problems as preschoolers and during their early school years. 
‘Early puberty may be part of an accelerated transition to adult 
development which begins early in life. This, in turn, heightens 
the risks for emotional and behavioural problems, comments 
George Patton. He thinks testosterone (for boys) and oestrogens 
(for girls) might interact with stress-regulation mechanisms 
from as early as infancy. Patton doesn’t scatremonger, and he 
teminded me that the communities children grow up in can 
still provide ‘social scaffolds’ or ‘buffers’ for early disadvantage. 
‘Parents remain the most important people in the lives of 
children, both boys and girls” he said. ‘We can put positive 
frameworks in place to support these children at this phase of 
their lives’ 
Mood changes at puberty 
Girls going through puberty experience frequent, intense and 
volatile emotions compared to adults and younger children 
(pethaps toddlers excluded). TWweens seem to experience 
higher highs and lower lows, and if they do feel happy about 
something, their positive feelings don’t always last as long as in 
adults. Parents of young girls are probably rolling their eyes at 
this ‘no kidding’ statement. 
Girls who experience early puberty are more likely to suffer 
from depression than late bloomers. This doesn’t happen to 
eatly-developing boys. Instead, boys are more susceptible to 
depression if they go through puberty /ar than their friends. 
Interestingly, late-but-normal-developing girls don’t show the 
same tisk of depression. In fact, late puberty is protective against 
depression. It’s thought very young girls are poorly equipped 
emotionally to deal with puberty. There is a mismatch between 
their maturing bodies and their psychological capacity to cope. 


[PDF page 92]

80 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Hormones ate the obvious scapegoat for puberty blues. But 
the rise of oestrogen at puberty cannot take the blame. 
In 2015 Australian researchers compiled data from fourteen 
studies of the effects of oestrogen on mood in adolescent 
girls. While they found a time-match between rising levels of 
oestrogen and the emergence of negative moods, there was 
insufficient data to confirm that oestrogen was the cause. 
Instead, puberty blues were thought to reflect the adjustment 
of the brain to the hormonal peaks and troughs of the monthly 
oon! 
This finding should give us pause for thought. We tend to 
blame our hormones for emotional instability during pregnancy 
(baby brain), after giving birth (baby blues) and during 
menopause (brain fog). But during all these life stages oestrogen 
is actually neuro-protective and improves mood. 
Finally, don’t forget that puberty in girls involves more than 
development of a reproductive system capable of producing 
offspring. Girls also experience: 
Q Fine tuning of brain networks. 
Q Increased sensitivity of the emotional, social and cognitive 
brain networks. 
Q Shifts in relationships with parents, friends and romantic 
partners. 
Shifts in values and morals. 
4#@ 40 The transition from primary school to high school. 
Q A growing awareness of the cultural and social expectations 
of what it means to be a woman, including the realisation 
that motherhood 1s a possibility. 
The convergence of multiple and challenging physical, 
cognitive, emotional and social vicissitudes naturally leads to 


[PDF page 93]

PUBERTY 81 
overwhelming feelings. In the words of Hillary Boswell, “The 
more we learn about puberty, the less it seems like chaos and 
mote of an incredible metamorphosis that leads to reproductive 
capacity and psychosocial maturation.’ Looking at the list of 
pubertal experiences, I suggest we should applaud the fact so 
many gitls emerge from puberty emotionally unscathed and 
thriving! 
Normal moods or a mental health problem? 
Because puberty is a time renowned for feeling worried, sad 
ot stressed, it’s difficult to discern ‘normal’ moodiness from a 
mental health problem. Because both boys and girls experience 
a wide range of emotions and behaviours as part of growing up 
healthy, any sign in isolation is not necessarily cause for concern. 
Australia’s mental health organisation beyondblue advises that 
when puberty blues are excessive or prolonged it’s important to 
do more than encourage cosy conversations with parents (which 
are important), but to also seek professional advice. 
All of the experts I spoke to emphasised that attitudes 
of patents are patamount as to how girls will cope with their 
changing bodies, regardless of how early, late or average they 
ate. If we don’t treat puberty as a crisis or project our own 
negative experiences onto girls, they’ll be much mote likely to 
thrive. 
Jocelyn Brewer, a psychologist and school counsellor based 
in Sydney, Australia, is a strong believer that communication 
can help solve some of the most tricky problems humans face in 
relationships. ‘Creating rich opportunities for conversation and 
communicating ideas and sharing experiences is an important 
way for parents to build connection with kids and have the 
rapport which might be needed in the teenage years when the 
need for parental guidance and help seeking is really important, 


[PDF page 94]

82 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
she says. “Ihe mote young people ate nurtured to reflect on 
experiences and express theit ideas, the more of a positive 
habit it will become.” Learning to deal with negative thoughts 
and emotions is just as important as learning how to cope with 
armpit hair or periods. 
While writing this chapter, I watched former US First Lady 
Michelle Obama give her final interview to Oprah Winfrey 
before leaving the White House. Her words echoed those of 
many health professionals: “Children will respond the way they 
see us tespond, she said. This is as relevant to puberty as it is to 
politics. 
How does puberty shape the brain? 
We'll cover in detail what happens in the brain during and 
after puberty in chapter 5. Up-and-coming neuroscientists 
take note: most of what we know about the neurobiology of 
puberty comes from studies of lab animals such as the Syrian 
hamster and mouse. And we know much more about the role 
of androgens in the brain than oestrogens. One particular area 
ripe for research is to uncover how ovarian hormones sculpt the 
brains and behaviours of teenage girls. 


[PDF page 95]

The Menstrual Cycle 
ONE OF THE DEFINING MOMENTS OF MY ADOLESCENCE WAS THE 
arrival of my first period. An avid reader, P’'d devoured Judy 
Blume’s Are You There God? Its Me, Margaret countless times, 
and I was desperate for womanhood with its bras, periods and 
school discos to begin. 
My younger sister was the first to hear the news that blood 
had made its longed-for appearance. I was twelve years and 
five months old — bang on average. The two of us were on 
school holidays with our aunty, who laughs remembering how 
completely unprepared she, a mother of a baby and toddler, was 
for dealing with her niece’s menarche. She had to tear up my 
baby cousin’s cloth nappy into strips to pin into my knickers 
Judy Blume-style until we made a trip to the tiny local store to 
stock up on supplies. I was secretly thrilled. 
The excitement of menarche out of the way, my period has 
played little more than a walk-on role in my life since. P’ve 
been fortunate to have never suffered serious cramps, heavy 
bleeding or irregular cycles. In fact, I barely paid attention to 
its comings and goings until I decided to conceive. Asking 
around, my nonchalance is clearly not universal. Pve heard 
83 


[PDF page 96]

84 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
stories of humiliating dashes to school loos with jumpers tied 
round blood-stained uniforms, days missed from school or 
wotk because of cramps, and problems with infertility and 
endometriosis. 
Our personal monthly 
neuroscience experiment 
Menstruation is.one of the few phenomena all biological females 
experience. Half the world’s population spend forty-odd years 
experiencing monthly fluctuations of hormones and bleeding. 
If we look-at the menstrual cycle from the perspective of 
neuroscience, we have a convenient natural experiment for 
looking at how ovarian hormones influence our brains. 
In a typical cycle, oestrogen and progesterone levels 
oscillate. They’re at their lowest in the first few days of bleeding. 
Oestrogen gradually rises towards the middle of the cycle 
when ovulation occurs, then drops off again. After ovulation, 
progesterone dominates then plummets just before bleeding 
begins. 
Because increases in oestrogen precede and then overlap 
with progesterone, it can be difficult to draw conclusions with 
regards to the exact role of each hormone, but we can take a 
good guess. Curious how oestrogen influences mood? Assess 
mid-cycle emotions. Wonder if falling progesterone impacts 
memoryr ‘Test memory in the days before menstruation. 
In this chapter we'll take a look at how monthly cycling of 
hormones modifies our thoughts and feelings. We'll learn about 
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and ask, why do some women 
suffer from it and others don’t? And we'll explore hormonal 
contraceptives and consider whether you’te more likely to be 
depressed if you’re on the pill. 


[PDF page 97]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 85 
Attitudes to menstruation matter 
Let’s face it: we're still squeamish talking about periods. Girls are 
traditionally taught ‘menstrual etiquette’ whereby periods must be 
spoken of 1n strictest privacy, indirectly, and certainly not to boys 
and men. Lauren Rosewarne, a researcher at the University of 
Melbourne, has written a book, Periods in Pop Culture: Menstruation 
in Film and Television on how etiquette and attitudes influence 
women’s experiences of their reproductive health.” 
When I spoke to Rosewarne, she pointed out that despite 
being a part of everyday life for half the world’s population, 
menstruation is very rarely portrayed on screen or in popular 
culture. Although part of this is probably because the 
biologically mundane doesn’t make for great T'V, Rosewarne 
believes the problem is when menstruation 1s portrayed it’s as ‘a 
petiod drama’. “Periods involve bad moods, floods of blood or 
social suicide, she says. ‘Because of this I see girls as young as 
seven feeling anxious about puberty, because they’re getting the 
impression their future periods will be a hassle or a depressing 
occurrence. We need to be cautious young girls don’t absorb 
outdated cultural notions about periods being a ‘curse’ or a 
source of shame because this can have life-long ramifications. 
The neural control of menstruation 
Let’s get the basic neuroendocrinology lesson out of the way. 
As we learned in the previous chapter, levels of FSH, LH, 
oestrogen and progesterone rise and fall over the menstrual 
cycle. Their intimate cyclical dance results in ovulation, which 
neatly divides the month into two phases: the follicular and the 
luteal phase. 


[PDF page 98]

86 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Day one of bleeding marks the start of the follicular phase 
and is when levels of all ovarian hormones are low. Low 
levels trigger FSH, which ripens egg-containing ovarian 
follicles. Over the next week FSH and LH levels climb, 
stimulating follicles to synthesise oestrogen from cholesterol. 
As oestrogen levels rise, a positive feedback loop to the brain 
elicits a large LH surge around day twelve. The LH surge 
triggers ovulation, typically within twelve to thirty-six hours. 
Incidentally, LH is the hormone you detect in those over-the- 
counter ovulation prediction kits. After ovulation, oestrogen 
manufacture slows and levels then drop sharply towards the 
end of the luteal phase. 
During the follicular phase, progesterone levels remain low, 
but soat in the days following ovulation when the ruptured 
follicle (corpus luteum) secretes progesterone. If you take a 
blood test around day eighteen, you'll find progesterone levels 
100-fold greater than oestrogen. Whereas oestrogen builds the 
endometrial lining of the uterus during the follicular phase, after 
ovulation progesterone takes over and primes the endometrium 
for pregnancy. 
If the egg is fertilised, it starts to secrete hCG, which ramps 
up corpus luteum progesterone production until the placenta 
takes over at around ten weeks’ gestation. Rising levels of 
progesterone feed back to the hypothalamus and pituitary gland 
inhibiting FSH and LH, and no mote eggs matute. 
In the absence of a pregnancy and without hCG support, 
the corpus luteum dies off, progesterone and oestrogen levels 
plummet, the lining of the uterus stops thickening and bleeding 
occurs. 
This process repeats roughly 450 times through the course 
of our lives, interrupted only by pregnancies or hormonal 
contraception, until menopause puts a stop to it altogether. 


[PDF page 99]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 87 
How do hormones get inside the brain? 
‘Hormones ate peas, and we're all princesses. No matter how 
Many mattresses you put between us and them, hormones still 
make us squirm, says Natalie Angier, New York Times science 
journalist, in her book Woman: An Intimate Geography.” Many of 
us grew up with this narrative and believe, without question, 
that hormones control our emotions. We believe we’re stuck on 
an emotional rollercoaster we can’t get off. 
How, exactly, do hormones influence our emotions? 
Oestrogen and progesterone alter the way in which neurons 
communicate with each other at the synapse, and affect all 
major neurotransmitter systems including those that use 
noradrenaline, dopamine, serotonin, glutamate and GABA. 
Hormones exert their effects on neurons and other cells 
by latching on to specific hormone recognition sites called 
receptors. Hormones can only act on a cell when their receptor 
is present. Think of a lock and key where the receptor is the lock 
and the hormone is the key. Turning the key sets off a cascade of 
biological responses inside the cell. 
Receptors for oestrogen are found throughout the 
brain, mostly in areas associated with reproduction ¢€.g. the 
hypothalamus and pituitary), cognition (e.g. the cerebral cortex) 
and emotion (e.g. the hippocampus and amygdala). Adding 
another layer of complexity, oestrogen is locally synthesised in 
the brain, where it may also regulate neural activity. Curiously, 
there are few human brain studies available for the distribution 
of progesterone receptors, so we assume from animal studies 
they’re found in broadly the same areas as for oestrogen. The 
widespread distribution of ovarian hormone teceptors and 
actions on neurons indicates that they have wide-ranging effects 
on how we think, feel and behave. 


[PDF page 100]

88 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
One of the most important and well-known effects of 
oestrogen is on the microstructure of neurons themselves, in 
particular the dendritic arbour of neurons. Dendrites and spines 
(tiny buds on dendrites on which synapses form) sprout and 
retract over the course of the oestrus cycle (the menstrual cycle 
equivalent in rodents). When levels of oestrogen are highest, 
spines flourish. When levels of oestrogen drop, spines retract. 
Our brains are capable of plasticity and the dendritic spine is 
the major site of this activity. Spines in the hippocampus and 
cortical areas related to cognition (the fancy neuroscience term 
for thinking) and emotion regulation are highly sensitive to 
oestrogen fluctuations. 
In humans, we don’t have the tools available to look at moment- 
by-moment effects of oestrogen on neuron microstructure or 
genes. Instead we must speculate what is happening based on 
animal work. However, modern neuroimaging techniques such 
as MRI and fMRI are useful tools to peer into the brains of 
women to see more broadly how hormones alter brain activity. 
I like to think of MRI as taking photos of the brain, whereas 
fMRI takes movies of the brain in action. Both brain-scanning 
techniques have their flaws, but for now they’re the best tools 
we have. 
Imaging the effects of hormones on the brain 
A tecent systematic review of twenty-four fMRI studies by a 
group at Uppsala University 1n Sweden concluded brain activation 
patterns differ between the follicular and luteal phases of the 
menstrual cycle or when women take hormonal contraceptives. 
Brain regions involved in emotion and cognition become more 
active or less active in response to changing oestrogen of 
progesterone levels."” The review did a good job summarising 
the ‘juvenile’ research field; however, the authors were unable 


[PDF page 101]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 89 
to say whether brain activity itself had anything to do with how 
women actually thought, felt or behaved as their hormone levels 
went up and down. Lucky for us, two of the authors went on to 
survey literature that explored exactly this issue. 
Does the menstrual cycle 
change how we feel? 
In their paper “Menstrual cycle influence on cognitive function 
and emotion processing — from a teproductive perspective’, 
Inger Sundstrom-Poromaa and Malin Gingnell summarise the 
findings of eighteen studies exploring how ovarian hormones 
pacify or provoke emotions."! 
One set of studies considered how empathy changes across 
the monthly cycle. Empathy — how able you ate to put yourself 
in someone else’s shoes and imagine how they think and 
feel — is a useful measure of emotional processing. One study 
showed women photos of faces portraying different emotions 
(e.g. anger, fear, happiness or disgust) and asked them to name 
the emotion. Another study had women read short sentences 
describing real-life situations, such as “You’ve lost a precious 
piece of jewellery’ or “Your child wins a swimming trace’, and 
asked them to imagine how they would feel if they were in the 
same situation. 
Results wete mixed. Some studies found empathy was 
lessened — women wete less able to recognise and name 
emotions — during the luteal phase of the cycle, when 
progesterone levels were high. Other studies found that empathy 
was unaffected by time of the month. 
Another way to measure emotion processing is via tests 
of emotional memory. Highly emotional events tend to be 
remembered better than neutral events, a phenomenon we can 


[PDF page 102]

90 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
all attest to. If you’ve given birth, I doubt you'll ever forget 
meeting your son or daughter for the first time. And those of us 
alive in 2001 will have durable memories of the horrific events 
of 9/11, for example. 
Again, results were mixed. Some studies found enhanced 
memory for emotional items during the luteal phase when 
progesterone levels are high and oestrogen levels are low, 
whereas others found no link. 
One study robustly linked the luteal phase to traumatic 
memories. Women were shown highly violent and upsetting 
film clips and a few days later asked how often scenes from 
the films had ‘spontaneously popped into their minds’. Women 
consistently reported more intrusive thoughts in the second half 
of their cycles than the first half. 
The tentative conclusion was that the luteal phase and 
accompanying high levels of progesterone heightened the risk 
for enhanced emotional memory and perhaps impaired emotion 
recognition (empathy). But because oestrogen and progesterone 
work together, and modulate classical neurotransmitters such 
as serotonin or dopamine, we can’t draw a straight line from 
hormone to brain activity to feelings or actions. I’d also note 
that this field of research is so new it’s practically pre-pubertal. 
We're not really at the point where we can image a woman’s 
brain, pinpoint her menstrual day and predict from that a 
thought, mood or behaviout. 
Does the menstrual cycle 
change how we think? 
Some people hold very polarised views on sex differences, many 
centred on cognitive aptitude and women’s ability to think and 


[PDF page 103]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 91 
reason. As Margaret McCarthy points out, ‘we should never 
easily accept a scientific conclusion that could be used to justify 
discrimination or limit opportunities for one sex. No matter 
how often we repeat that different does not mean better, there is 
always a tendency to conclude that certain skill sets are superior 
over others.” 
Despite being an archaic notion, the belief that our monthly 
cycles affect our cognitive skills is widespread. Google it. You'll 
find headlines such as “Bleeding On The Job: A Menstruation 
Investigation. How menstruating at the office can sap women’s 
productivity’, or even, ‘Periods cripple women’s careers’, and, of 
course, Trump’s offensive 2016 comment that journalist Megyn 
Kelly’s ability to do her job well was impeded because she ‘had 
blood coming out of her wherever’. 
The scientific community has closely investigated these 
claims by looking at how sex hormones directly alter our 
capacity to think, reason and remember. 
One predominant hypothesis is that we’re at our cognitive 
best at ‘masculine’ tasks when we’re ‘least hormonal’, and best at 
‘feminine’ tasks when we’te ‘most hormonal’. Before we go on, 
I urge you to think back to the introduction when we discussed 
d-values as a measure of the degree of overlap between men’s 
and women’s skills. 
The best-known example of cognitive sexual dimorphism 1s 
mental rotation, which is the ability to rotate 3D objects in your 
mind. There’s plenty of overlap between men’s and women’s 
performance, but the average man is better at this than the 
average woman (even in careful studies it has a d-value around 
2.0). Reasons given for the gender gap include everything from 
prenatal testosterone to young boys’ proclivity for Lego.™ 
One notion is that women excel at 3D rotation only when all 
hormone levels ate low, such as during their periods. 


[PDF page 104]

92 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Sundstr6m-Poromaa and Gingnell’s reviews found no data 
supporting this notion. Even when they ditched data from half 
the studies that had methodological flaws, four of six studies 
were unable to detect any changes in mental rotation ability due 
to time of the month. 
The Swedes also looked at two classic tests of mental prowess: 
verbal fluency and verbal memory. Verbal fluency tests ask you 
to name, say, as many words beginning with the letter “G’ as you 
can in one minute. Verbal memory tasks involve remembering 
word lists of random objects such as a shopping list. Verbal 
fluency and memory also show sexual dimorphism: the average 
woman performs better than the average man (d-values sit 
around 1.0). It was hypothesised that women should perform 
better at verbal fluency and memory when oestrogen levels were 
high. But the review found little evidence in support of this 
notion either — there were no clear changes in memory ability 
across the menstrual cycle. 
As an aside, I was unable to uncover any decent study 
on IQ (the best-known measure of intelligence) and the 
menstrual cycle. There are some people (oddly, none of whom 
ate women) who appear to have a vested interest in proving 
women’s intellectual inferiority. As such they often quote a 
2004 meta-analysis that found, on average, men score four 
to five IQ points higher than women. Numerous subsequent 
analyses have found no support for this, and critics of the 
study believed that their methodology was deeply flawed.** An 
example given was that the authors excluded one large study of 
sex differences in IQ (accounting for forty-five per cent of the 
total available data). If it had been included, no sex difference 
would have been found. 
This is good news! Our cognitive capabilities and intelligence 
are not held captive by hormones. We have clear empirical 


[PDF page 105]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 93 
evidence that women can learn, remember and reason during 
our fertile years and beyond. Who knew? 
One of the central tenets of neuroscience and psychology is 
out ability to thoughtfully regulate our emotions. Our prefrontal 
cottex (PFC) exerts top-down control over emotion-processing 
centres such as the amygdala and hippocampus. Learning to 
identify, understand and manage our emotions isn’t just a core 
life skill we develop during childhood and adolescence: it’s a 
neurobiological reality. 
PMS, mood and the menstrual cycle 
Clearly, there are only so many deductions we can make about 
how we think and feel from very granular measures of empathy, 
vetbal memory, 3D. mental rotation skills or brain scans. So, 
let’s look more broadly at everyday experiences of mood and the 
menstrual cycle. 
PMS is the collective term for symptoms that show up in 
the week before your period starts. PMS is widely blamed on 
low levels of oestrogen combined with the sudden drop in 
progesterone (if no pregnancy occurs) in the late luteal phase. 
Symptoms range from mild to debilitating. Emotional 
symptoms include mood swings, foggy thinking, anger, tension, 
weepiness, anxiety, irritability, fatigue, and feeling out of control. 
Physical symptoms include sore breasts, headaches, migraines, 
skin problems and bloating. The full list is astonishing and 
upwatds of 150 different symptoms can be used to diagnose 
PMS. 
While writing this book it was extraordinarily difficult to 
find consensus on how many women actually suffer from PMS. 
I expected there would be stacks of research and the statistics 
would be clear-cut. This is not the case. 


[PDF page 106]

94 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
A Google search reveals PMS affects ‘a high percentage of 
women of childbearing age’. The Women’s Health & Research 
Institute of Australia claims ‘most regularly ovulating women’ 
experience some physical and mood symptoms during the 
premenstrual phase. One meta-analysis found just under half 
of women globally suffer from PMS; but the prevalence varies 
across countries. For example, in Iran ninety-five per cent of 
women claim to suffer from PMS, whereas in France only 
twelve per cent claim to.*’ To complicate matters, there is also 
a severe form of PMS called Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 
(PMDD). The literature sets the prevalence of PMDD at 
somewhere between one per cent and eight per cent. 
I can only conclude that somewhere between hardly anyone 
and almost everyone suffers from PMS. 
Is PMS a modern-day myth? 
Sarah Romans is a professor of psychological medicine 
at the University of Otago in New Zealand. Romans runs 
a clinical psychiatry practice and over the years she’s become 
curious about why women ascribe their irritable moods to PMS. 
She isn’t convinced that the menstrual cycle is the root cause of 
all mood variability and that women are the ‘emotional victims’ 
of their reproductive biology. 
In 2012, Romans published a paper 1n Gender Medicine that 
pooled data from forty-seven studies examining the association 
between time of the month and mood. Taken together, the 
studies failed to find any clear evidence of mood changes driven 
by the phase of the menstrual cycle. In particular, little evidence 
was found of mood swings or of a specific ‘premenstrual 
negative mood syndrome’.** 
Subsequent research published in 2013 described how 
Romans and her team set up the Mood in Daily Life (MiDL) 


[PDF page 107]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 95 
study. They recruited healthy Canadian women between the 
ages of eighteen and forty-nine and gave them a mobile phone 
that prompted them with daily questions about mood. Women 
were asked if they were feeling irritable, on top of things, 
confident, sad, energetic, weepy and so on. They were also asked 
about general health and wellbeing, social support, perceived 
stress and day of menstrual cycle. Tellingly, the women were 
never told the study was investigating PMS. Over six months 
395 menstrual cycles from nearly eighty women were analysed.” 
The MiDL study found little evidence to support that 
premenstrual phase by itself influenced mood. Instead, mood 
was more closely influenced by one of three culprits — lack of 
social support, perceived stress or poor physical health. 
‘Knowledge shapes women’s own expectations about their 
health,’ says Romans, who told me she uses her research findings 
daily in the clinic. Romans doesn’t believe all women suffer from 
emotional turmoil before their periods; instead, many women 
ate falsely ascribing their moods to their hormonal status. When 
she asks her patients to track their daily mood over the course of 
a few months, only about ‘one in twenty’ show negative changes 
in mood that sync with their premenstrual phase. Interestingly, 
this is a similar proportion of women who are diagnosed with 
PMDD - the severe clinical form of PMS. 
The ‘PMS as a myth’ concept is one many feminist 
commentators agree with. “Ihe notion of premenstrual 
irrationality, unreliability and irritability 1s a consistent theme, 
invariably attributed to raging hormones, and reinforcing 
the perception of menstruation as a curse, says Jane Ussher, 
Professor of Women’s Health Psychology, Centre for Health 
Research, Western Sydney University.” 
Ussher explains that for millennia, women had their emotions 
attributed to the ‘wandering womb’ (the root of the hysteria 1s 


[PDF page 108]

96 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
derived from the Greek word /ysera, meaning uterus). The uterus 
was thought to travel around the body, causing all manner of 
ailments, with sex and pregnancy the prescribed cure. ‘In the 
Victorian era, the diagnosis of hysteria was widespread, and 
women’s dissatisfaction and marital disobedience were again 
blamed on the womb, says Ussher. She points out that even today, 
cultural images of premenstrual madness abound, with YouTube 
clips and cartoons depicting the ‘premenstrual witch’, while self- 
help books compete to counsel women on coping with PMS.” 
Romans, Ussher and others believe that negative expectations 
about PMS have become a self-fulfilling prophecy. “Many 
women ate diagnosing themselves as having PMDD or PMS 
and, as a result, not looking for alternative causes for their 
distress,’ says Ussher.”” 
It’s worth pointing out the key strength of Romans’s research 
approach. Many studies only ever ask women about their negarive 
ptemenstrual experiences, such as feeling depressed, weepy or 
irritable. They fail to ask about posittve mood, such as feeling 
happy, energetic or confident. This automatically skews the data 
towards the negative, and leads to an incomplete and biased 
description of experiences. ‘If only negative mood is studied, it 
will erroneously be concluded to be the only direction in which 
mood varies, says Romans. 
Outside of academia, you'd be hard pressed to find a 
newspaper article or the like talking about women who feel 
energetic, creative or happy before their periods arrive. There 
are some ‘positive period’ movements that encourage women 
to celebrate and embrace the ‘moon time’ as a ‘sacred goddess’ 
experience. Even if these are empowering concepts for some 
women, they still generally promote the premenstrual phase as 
a time for ‘nurturing oneself’, not necessarily as a time when 
many women feel upbeat. 


[PDF page 109]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 97 
Ussher believes premenstrual emotions are an understandable 
reaction to the stresses and strains of life, and takes the feminist 
viewpoint that for three weeks of the month women silence 
their irritation and unhappiness, thus conforming to societal 
expectations of ‘the good woman’. At other times of the month 
women blame their husbands, workload or lack of sleep for 
their moods. ‘Premenstrually, this self-silencing is broken, but 
the expression of negative thoughts and feelings is invariably 
dismissed as PMS,’ she says. 
Not everyone supports Ussher’s and Romans’s commentary. 
Jayashnt Kulkarni is one such critic. Kulkarni suggests that 
the notion PMS 1s ‘all in women’s minds as opposed to their 
endocrinology’ ignores the vast body of neuroscience work 
about the integration of hormones with mental processes. 
“Today, we don’t have to take the view that women’s biology, 
including their hormone profiles, are unimportant. We can 
reclaim biology and integrate it with the psychological plus 
social contexts to see that PMS does exist and does cause real 
suffering for many women,’ she says.”! 
When I spoke to Kulkarni on the phone, she said women 
may differ in their sensitivity to hormones, perhaps via genetic 
variations in receptor structure or number. Perhaps women react 
to hormones similarly to how ‘orchid’ and ‘dandelion’ children 
respond to stress. 
Does reseatch dismiss PMS as ‘all in your head’? Romans 
suggests women struggling with this new idea should try to 
take a more nuanced approach to the causes of their emotions. 
‘We should consider more broadly what’s going on in our 
lives, and take a look at the quality of our relationships and 
our physical health before blaming our reproductive function, 
she says. I asked Romans how she talks with women who 
blame their hormones, or who feel their PMS experiences are 


[PDF page 110]

98 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
being dismissed; she said, ‘I say to them, “Well, it could be 
your hormones, let’s get some data on that first.”” She tries to 
encourage women to look more broadly at what else is going 
on in their lives. “his puzzlingly widespread belief needs 
challenging, as it perpetuates negative concepts linking female 
reproduction with negative emotionality, she says. 
Premenstrual Dysmorphic Disorder 
PMDD appears to be less controversial, at least among health 
professionals. It even has its own entry in the psychiatrists’ 
bible, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). 
PMDD is currently considered a type of mood disorder — 
alongside depression and bipolar disorder. ‘To be diagnosed 
with PMDD, women must tick five of eleven symptom 
boxes including: marked mood swings, irritability, anxiety or 
depression. Symptoms must appear in the week before bleeding, 
stop once bleeding starts, and be absent the week after bleeding 
has ended. Symptoms must cause clinically significant distress 
or interfere with everyday life or relationships. A study in the 
US found PMDD prevalence sitting at around 1.3 per cent.” 
There is plenty of debate as to whether PMDD is ‘ordinary 
depression’ that gets worse premenstrually, or if it stands alone. 
DSM-5 is often criticised for ‘diagnostic inflation’ reducing 
thresholds for existing disorders, and introduces new disorders 
resulting in many newly mislabelled ‘patients’. In any case, 
management of PMDD has moved from the gynaecologist’s to 
the psychiatrist’s office. 
A clue as to the neural origins of PMDD comes from the 
cuttent best treatment — the antidepressant drug class of 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Serotonin is 
linked to good mood and SSRIs improve mood by increasing 
the amount of serotonin available in the synapse. 


[PDF page 111]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 99 
In 2015, Swedish researchers Comasco and Sundstrém- 
Poromaa completed a review of the PMDD brain-imaging 
literature (which, to be honest, is pretty sparse). They found 
that in women with PMDD the limbic system and PFC aren’t 
working in harmony. Remember that in a healthy adult brain the 
PFC is able to thoughtfully modulate the emotions emerging 
from the limbic system. PMDD symptoms might be due to 
exaggerated ‘bottom-up’ activity in the limbic brain and blunted 
‘top-dowrr activation of the PFC. This type of dysfunctional 
dialogue between cognition and emotion is commonly seen in 
depression, and seems to be exacerbated in the luteal phase of 
women with PMDD.” 
Does the pill cause depression? 
While I was writing this chapter, Romans published another 
paper with the provocative title “Crying, oral contraceptive use 
and the menstrual cycle’ using the MiDL study to examine, as 
the title suggests, the relationship between crying, the pill and 
time of the month.”* 
‘Crying 1s a mysterious biological and sociocultural 
phenomenon universally found in human societies with a strongly 
gendered profile: women cry more than men, Romans writes. 
Women in the study reported that they /e/t like crying mote often 
premenstrually and during their period, compared to their mid- 
cycle phase, but they didn’t actually cry more or less at different 
times of the month. Women on the pill were no more or less likely 
to cry, or feel like crying compared to naturally cycling women. 
There is spatse research on crying itself, but mountains 
of anecdotes and news headlines claiming the pill makes you 
sad and weepy, of more prone to everything from weight 
gain to psychosis. One large study hit global headlines when 


[PDF page 112]

100 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
it was published in JAMA Psychiatry in September 2016.” ‘Tt’s 
not in your head: Striking new study links pill to depression’ 
announced newspaper headlines. ‘We knew it! You're finally 
taking us seriously, replied women around the globe. 
The study, which was conducted in Denmark, accessed 
fourteen years’ worth of health data from more than one million 
Danish women aged fifteen to thirty-four. The researchers 
asked the simple question: Is use of hormonal contraception 
associated with treatment of depressionr 
Danish health data tracked which women took hormonal 
contraception (over half the women in the study) including 
varied contraceptive methods (combined pill, implants and 
intrauterine devices — IUDs), and data also indicated who was 
diagnosed with depression. A depression diagnosis was counted 
if women wete given an antidepressant prescription (thirteen per 
cent of all women in the study), or diagnosed with depression in 
a psychiatric hospital (two per cent of all women in the study). 
The study concluded that use of hormonal contraceptives, 
especially among adolescents, was indeed associated with 
subsequent use of antidepressants and a first diagnosis of 
depression. But before you throw out your pill packet, let’s take 
a Closer look at the results. 
For all women in the study, there was a twenty-three per cent 
increase in re/ative risk of being prescribed antidepressants after 
beginning the pill. Data revealed that the outcome was worse for 
teens, with an eighty per cent increased re/atzve risk of developing 
depression on the pill. Newspapers widely reported this finding. 
But some headlines got it very wrong and stated that eighty per 
cent of all women on the pill get depressed. 
It is really important to understand how ‘tisk’ gets reported. 
Relative tisk (which was reported in the newspapers) is one of 
two ways to describe the same statistic. Relative risk tells us very 


[PDF page 113]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 101 
little, but it sounds impressive and often scary. Absolute risk, on 
the other hand, tells you how likely it is that the something will 
actually happen to you. 
Looking at the data from an absolute risk perspective we 
see 2.1 per cent of women taking the pill filled a script for 
antidepressants, compared to 1.7 per cent of women not on the 
pill. Or in simpler terms, take 100 women and over the course 
of a year, /ess than one extra woman on the pill will be prescribed an 
antidepressant. 
For all the women taking the pill, 0.30 per cent were admitted 
to a psychiatric hospital; by comparison, for all women vo/ taking 
the pill, 0.28 per cent were admitted to a psychiatric hospital (we 
can assume women admitted to hospital had serious cases of 
depression). The absolute risk for psychiatric admission when 
on the pill was tiny. 
The Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in 
the UK states that based on the Danish data, an honest doctor 
would simply have to tell her patient that, on average, only one 
in 221 women exposed to hormonal contraception over a yeat is 
likely to subsequently be prescribed an antidepressant. And only 
one in 2441 women ts likely to be diagnosed with depression at 
a psychiatric hospital.”° 
The statistics simply do not support headlines that state the 
pill causes depression in eighty per cent of women. 
What was rately reported was the finding that after taking 
hormonal contraceptives for a year, the (small) increased risk for 
depression in teenagers wore off. And it’s entirely possible the 
younger women were more susceptible because teens ate mote 
vulnerable to developing depression anyway. 
There is a big ‘but’ to the soothing advice issued by the Royal 
College: not everyone with depression takes antidepressants, 
and not everyone seeks help if they’re feeling blue. 


[PDF page 114]

102 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
What happens to your brain on the pill? 
For many women, even a modest reduction in general wellbeing 
when taking the pill is not worth the contraceptive benefit. Many 
of us have probably experienced mood swings, irritability or 
other emotional issues when we’re on the pill — symptoms that 
aren’t severe enough to warrant an antidepressant prescription or 
psychiatric admission. This may explain the high discontinuation 
rate and irregular use of the pill as a contraceptive method. 
In 2017, a study published in the journal Fertility and Sterility 
found that healthy women reported reduced quality of life, mood 
and physical wellbeing after taking a common birth control pill 
for three months. 
The study from the Karolinska Institutet was a double-blind, 
randomised, placebo-controlled trial which meant that neither 
the researchers giving out the pills nor the women taking 
them knew whether they were getting a placebo (sugar pill) or 
contraceptive pill. All 340 healthy women (aged eighteen to 
thirty-five) filled out surveys on wellbeing and mental health 
at the beginning and end of the study. The women on the 
pill rated their quality of life to be significantly lower during 
the study than those who were given placebos. Both general 
quality of life and specific aspects like mood, wellbeing, self- 
control, vitality and energy level were affected negatively by the 
contraceptives. Unlike the Danish million-women study, no 
significant increase in depression was observed.” 
Sometimes alternative methods of contraception fix 
symptoms. I can personally attest to this scenario when I felt 
one version of the combined pill left me feeling emotionally 
out of control (precisely one of the outcomes of the Karolinska 
study). On the recommendation of an insightful women’s health 
nurse I switched pill brands and never looked back. 


[PDF page 115]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 103 
When weighing up pros and cons of depression or wellbeing 
versus the pill, we need to carefully consider why we might 
want to use hormonal contraception. Not only does the pill 
have many positive health benefits such as reducing cancer risk, 
avoiding pregnancy 1s hardly a trivial health outcome. Hormonal 
contraceptives ate among the most reliable forms of birth 
control, and can be a great way to reduce anxiety around the 
potential of an unplanned pregnancy.”* As we'll explore in later 
chapters, pregnancy and childbirth can make you pretty blue too. 
One possible mechanism whereby the pill may affect general 
wellbeing is a direct negative effect of the progestin (synthetic 
progesterone) component in the pill on the brain. Progesterone 
can exett a sedative effect on the brain, and dampens down 
neural activity. “Although we did not find statistically significant 
effects on depressive symptoms, say the authors of the 
Karolinska Institutet study, ‘it is possible that a direct progestin- 
induced central nervous system effect could be the underlying 
mechanism behind reduced wellbeing, self-control and vitality 
in the oral contraceptive group.” 
Different hormonal contraceptives work in different ways. 
For example, the combined oestrogen/progestin contraceptive 
formula inhibits release of GnRH, and in turn LH and FSH, 
thus preventing ovulation (see how that earlier endocrine lesson 
is coming in handy!). Progesterone-only pills work in roughly 
the same way. Progesterone-only IUDs don’t prevent ovulation, 
instead they make the uterus more hostile for both sperm and 
eggs if they are released. 
The implications of the pill are complex because it both 
suppresses your natural levels of ovarian hormones and 
simultaneously elevates levels of synthetic hormones for very 
short butsts every day (the half-life of synthetic hormones is 
only a few hours, which is why you need to take the pill daily). 


[PDF page 116]

104 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
We surmise that synthetic hormones cause the same changes 
to brain structure and neurochemistry as natural hormones do, 
in the short term at least. These changes probably underlie the 
reported increased risk of depression and mood changes — both 
good and bad. But believe it or not, no-one has yet looked at the 
long-term effects of the pill on the brain. 
As with the menstrual cycle, most studies of the pill have 
looked at sexually dimorphic behaviours (1.e. those that differ 
between males, and females). Not that men take the pill, of 
course, but the assumption is that these behaviours may be 
under the influence of ovarian hormones. 
In terms of.tests of cognitive ability (3D mental rotation, 
vetbal fluency and memory), the results are mixed. Some studies 
report better mental rotation performance in pill users — so 
women on the pill perform more like many men. Other studies 
show enhanced verbal memory when on the pill — some women 
on the pill perform more like, well, women. 
Reports on mood are equally inconsistent. Some women 
report feeling more emotionally stable on birth control 
(especially if they experiment with finding a pill that works for 
them) but others report depression, anxiety, fatigue, neurotic 
symptoms, compulsion and anger. It’s like there are two 
populations of women with differential emotional responses to 
sex hormones. Jayashr1 Kulkarni’s orchid—dandelion hypothesis 
might yet prove to be correct. 
A 2014 overview of this field can be found in the open access 
journal Frontiers in Neuroscience, published with the alluring title: 
‘50 years of hormonal contraception — time to find out what it 
does to our brain’. Sadly, it’s not yet time to find out that much: 
the authors say they could only summarise ‘sparse findings’.” 
Clearly, this is yet another pre-pubertal field of study, and 
despite more than fifty years of oral contraceptive use by millions 


[PDF page 117]

THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 105 
of women around the globe, all researchers can conclude is that 
‘there is a strong demand for additional studies’. 
With all the talk about suppressing ovulation, let’s not forget, 
our brains use hormones and emotions to drive us towards 
lust, love, sex, pleasure and procreation (not simply towards 
irritability, depression and anxiety!). 


[PDF page 118]

The Teenage Brain 
A FEW YEARS AGO, MY HUSBAND AND I CELEBRATED OUR JOINT 
fortieth birthdays with a 1990s-themed party. I wore a blue 
Monica Lewinsky—style dress, one friend came as Pu/p Fiction’s 
Mia Wallace, and there were plenty of double-denim ensembles, 
Doc Martens and pirate shirts. Our playlist was dominated by 
the music of Oasis, Blur, Coldplay and U2. Despite growing up 
on opposite sides of the world, in New Zealand and Ireland, 
my husband and I have found that very similar soundtracks 
accompanied the memories of our teens and early twenties — 
songs out boys now hilariously call “Dad music’. 
Nostalgia for the music you loved in your teens is commonplace 
and can teach us a lot about the heightened plasticity of adolescent 
social, emotional and cognitive brain networks. 
The songs from your halcyon days feel like ‘your music’ 
because music choice has important social consequences when 
you're young. As teens we're strongly driven to find a new tribe. 
Part of the desire to fit in means teens are exquisitely sensitive 
to being left out. Teens just want to be accepted and valued 
members of a tribe, so they'll do their best to dress alike, share 
interests and listen to the same music. 
106 


[PDF page 119]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 107 
Passions run deep during adolescence. Emotions add colour 
and resonance to our lives and also send the signal, ‘Hey, this 
is what’s important.’ We have a strong tendency to remember 
events (good and bad) that have an emotional component 
because the brain pays attention to and ‘tags’ such memories as 
important. 
Many adults have what is called a ‘reminiscence bump’, or 
particularly vivid memories of the thrilling years between ten 
and thirty. Compared with our childhood or midlife, we have 
superior recall of the books we read, films we watched, patties 
we attended and the accompanying soundtracks. 
Adolescence is proving to be a phase of heightened brain 
plasticity — your capacity to learn peaks and the memories 
forged are particularly indelible. However, with enhanced 
plasticity comes increased vulnerability. As Natalie Angier says, 
‘Who can forget adolescence? And who has ever recovered 
from it?” 
Halfway between girlhood and womanhood 
Biology determines the beginning of adolescence. The sick- 
tuck-tick Of the hypothalamic clock signals the beginning of 
the transition from girl to woman. The end of adolescence 
has no clear biological demarcation. When exactly do girls 
become adults? When they’re physically able to have a baby? 
Or when they actually have a baby? When they turn eighteen? 
Finish school? Leave homer Get their first full-time job? Buy a 
house? Get married? With puberty starting earlier than it used 
to and the traditional cultural markers of adulthood somewhat 
irrelevant, ‘adolescence’ could last decades! Because adolescence 
mostly spans the teenage years, in this chapter I’ll use the two 
terms interchangeably. 


[PDF page 120]

108 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Despite its current unclear cultural or social endpoint, 
biologically adolescence is a distinct period of brain development. 
Its when the brain becomes particularly vulnerable to 
reorganisation by sex hormones and when the cognitive, 
emotional and social circuits refine and mature. Tracking 
alongside the brain changes are the stereotypical changes to the 
thoughts, emotions and behaviours of the brain’s teenage owner. 
~The stereotype of the 
teenage brain is wrong 
Let’s be honest, we have a tendency to wring our hands over all 
the things that can go wrong for girls in their teenage years. We 
hope like heck our daughters emerge as healthy well-rounded 
women who've avoided pregnancy, eating disorders, depression, 
bullying, sexual assault, drugs and the modern-day pitfalls of 
social media addiction and online harassment. 
As well as being schooled on how to avoid all of the above, 
teenage gitls have to contend with neuroscience explanations 
as to why their ‘immature’ brains make them so vulnerable 
to such vices. The assumption seems to be that the teenage 
years are a minefield and many girls are unlikely to survive 
unscathed. 
A few years ago, researchers in the UK took the unusually 
insightful step of asking a group of eighty-five teenagers what 
their thoughts were on neuroscience explanations of ‘the teenage 
brain’. Intriguingly, most participants weren’t that interested in 
what neuroscience could teach them about themselves. Some 
said it was ‘boring’, whereas others found it intrusive and 
unseemly, turning teenagers into ‘oddities’, alienating them, 
underscoring their relattve powerlessness and threatening their 
agency. (If you’re a neuroscientist, I’m sorry, they don’t seem to 


[PDF page 121]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 109 
care much for your work.) ‘Do we want to see into adult brains? 
So why teenage brains?’ asked one. 
The young people who took part in the survey were smart 
enough to see the potential for neuroscience research, but felt 
it could be better used to obtain insights into teen behaviour 
without using it to pile on the usual load of moral judgement 
and stereotyping. “Ieenagers are often misunderstood, and it 
might be helpful if people knew how they think, see their point 
of view, was one response, and, ‘It will help defeat stereotypes, 
said another.'”” 
Adults seem to find both humour and horror in the concept 
of the adolescent brain. Somehow, we forget about the many 
positive outcomes that result from owning and operating such 
adaptable neural circuitry. Young women can be wonderfully 
compassionate, empathic and devoted friends, passionate 
advocates for causes they believe in, highly motivated and goal- 
otiented, and they’re at the peak of their learning potential and 
creativity. 
So, on behalf of teenage girls everywhere, let us begin a 
careful and objective exploration of their brains. 
The teenage brain is still 
undergoing development 
Most scholats agree on three facts about the teenage brain.'"! 
First, brain structure continues to change between childhood 
and adulthood. Grey matter volume peaks at puberty, then 
declines throughout adolescence and into the twenties. White 
matter volume increases throughout childhood, adolescence 
and into adulthood. 
Second, girls’ brains mature slightly faster than boys’. ‘This 
sex difference in brain development is in sync with physical 


[PDF page 122]

110 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
development where, on average, girls enter puberty a year or 
two before boys, who then quickly catch up. 
Third, different brain regions mature at different rates. 
Development of the limbic system, which drives emotions, 
speeds up at puberty, but the PFC, which 1s involved in 
thinking and judgement, doesn’t mature until our twenties. 
This causes a ‘developmental mismatch’ between emotion 
and reward processing, and thinking and judgement. The 
mismatch determines aspects of teenage behaviour such as 
being overly emotional, impulsive and hypersensitive to social 
situations, 
- 
Grey matter thins as connections are refined 
The prefrontal cortex, as its name suggests, sits at the front of 
the brain and is sometimes called the brain’s CEO because it 
acts as a wise leader, exerting top-down control over other brain 
ateas. The PFC is involved in emotion regulation, judgement, 
strategy, impulse control, attention, working memory and social 
cognition — navigating complex social relationships such as 
discerning friend from ‘frenemy’ from foe. 
During childhood, the grey matter of the PFC continues 
to thicken as neurons make new synapses, much like a tree 
growing extra branches, twigs and roots. During the teens, 
thinning occurs across much of the cortex but is most obvious 
in the PFC. 
Loss or thinning of grey matter always sounds unhealthy, 
but as is often the case with the brain, less is more. Grey 
matter loss is vitally important and is due to pruning away 
of unwanted ‘twigs and branches’, which partly depends on 
experience in a ‘use it or lose it’ manner. Connections that are 
being used are strengthened and those that aren’t being used 
ate pruned away. 


[PDF page 123]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 111 
More white matter enables faster communication 
MRI scans have revealed ever-increasing volumes of white 
matter in the tracts leading to and from the PFC during 
adolescence. Recall that axons ate insulated by myelin, which 
speeds up signalling between brain regions. Myelinated axons 
transmit impulses up to 100 times faster than unmyelinated 
axons, and faster transmission means faster mental processing. 
Jay Giedd, a neuroscientist at the University of California, 
San Diego, has found that increased white matter means the 
connections between brain regions become stronger and more 
numerous. The brain matures by becoming more interconnected 
and mote specialised. 
To use Giedd’s metaphor, brain maturation is not so much 
a matter of adding new letters to the alphabet but one of 
combining existing letters into words, words into sentences 
and sentences into paragraphs. “These changes ultimately help 
the brain to specialise in everything from complex thinking to 
being socially adept, he says.'"* 
Subcortical brain areas shrink and grow 
Changes to white and grey matter structure are not restricted 
to the PEC. Subcortical brain structures start to mature right 
around puberty, and development is more or less complete by 
the mid-teenage years. 
Subcortical brain regions ate those deep inside the brain 
under (‘sub’) the cortex in the frontal and temporal lobes. 
They include the limbic system (hippocampus and amygdala), 
and the corpus striatum, which is made up of four parts: 
nucleus accumbens, caudate, putamen and globus pallidus. 
They’re connected to the PFC and to each other by bundles 
of axons. 


[PDF page 124]

112 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
In girls, the amygdala and hippocampus get bigger during 
puberty. At the same time, the four structures making up the 
corpus striatum all shrink. Maturation of subcortical structures 
is fastest in late childhood and early adolescence but the rate of 
growth or shrinkage slows right down after age sixteen.'”* '°* 
The social brain develops 
during adolescence 
The ‘social brain’ includes brain areas involved in social 
cognition — skills allowing us to navigate the complexities of 
relationships, -attract a mate, discern friend from foe, and 
recognise the thoughts and feelings of others. Social brain 
networks include the PFC, cortical regions involved in face 
processing, and also a specific region called the temporoparietal 
junction (TPJ). The TP] 1s situated where the temporal and 
parietal lobes meet. If you scratch your head just above and back 
a bit from your ear, you'll be 1n about the right spot. 
During adolescence, the social brain architecture refines 
and adult-like patterns of neural activity emerge. Maturation of 
social behaviours tracks alongside the changes in brain structure 
and activity. 
Teenage brains join a new tribe 
During childhood, girls have their most intimate relationships 
with their parents and siblings, explains psychologist Lisa 
Damour in her fascinating book Untangled: Guiding Teenage Girls 
Through the Seven Transitions into Adulthood. ‘Girls break up with 
their parents when they become teenagers, she says.’ As girls 
matute, they aren’t just looking to make new friends; part of the 
ptocess of growing up is replacing family with a tribe that they 
can feel proud to call their own. 


[PDF page 125]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 113 
Because belonging to a new tribe is so critically important 
to girls, being at odds with or different from their friends 
leads to distress. Damour says she can’t overstate the significance 
of a teenager’s tribe membership, “The fear of being tribeless — 
distanced from one’s family yet without a peer group — cuts to 
the quick and leads to the idealisation of popularity and the 
social connections that come with it.!> 
There is a strong evolutionary drive to leave the family 
nest and explore. All young social animals, from puppies to 
porpoises, would rather frolic with their friends than their 
parents. ‘Social reorientation’ or the shift of focus from 
self and family to same-age friends is deeply biological — it 
diminishes the likelihood of inbreeding and creates a healthier 
genetic population. 
The painful consequences of being left out 
If you're feeling brave, cast your mind back to your teenage 
yeats and recall a time when you felt excluded. Most of us won’t 
have to think too hard to remember a time (teal or imagined) 
we weren't invited to a party or trip to the mall or sleepover. 
Remember those dreadful popularity-ranking lists that were 
penned and passed around the class? For those of us who fell 
neat the bottom of the list, weren’t invited to the party or were 
the target of taunting (and that was all of us at one time or 
another), it was exquisitely painful. Girls have a particular knack 
for meanness and passive—ageressive bullying such as freezing 
someone out, spreading cruel gossip or deliberate exclusion, and 
meanness and bullying are a big cause of sadness, depression 
and self-harm in teenage girls.'”° 
The feat of being left out or ostracised threatens some of our 
most fundamental human needs, such as self-esteem, feeling 
like a valued member of a group and our sense of meaningful 


[PDF page 126]

114 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
existence. Cruel as it sounds, researchers can deliberately induce 
the feelings of exclusion in order to study them. 
In one such game called Cyberball, invented by Purdue 
University psychologist Professor Kipling Williams, participants 
play online catch with two other ‘players’. After a few throws 
of the virtual ball, the other ‘players’ stop throwing the ball 
to the participant, who has been led to believe they’re playing 
with real people, but it’s actually a pre-programmed computer 
game. They’te also told that a skill such as mental visualisation 
is being assessed (telling them they’re about to be manipulated 
into feeling left out kind of defeats the purpose). Many 
thousands of young people and adults have played Cyberball 
and it reliably induces feelings of rejection, anger and sadness 
in the ostracised player even 1f they play for only a few minutes. 
‘Being excluded or ostracised is an invisible form of bullying 
that doesn’t leave bruises, and therefore we often underestimate 
its impact, says Williams. He says that being left out, whether 
it’s by friends or strangers, can be excruciating. And the painful 
feelings last for a long time.'”” 
Professor Sarah-Jayne Blakemore is a University College 
London neuroscientist, credited with creating the discipline 
of adolescent brain development and for showing adolescence 
as a time of remarkable plasticity and sensitivity to social and 
educational experiences. 
Using fMRI, Blakemore has compared social brain responses 
to rejection in teenage girls and adult women. In one Cyberball 
study of nineteen girls (aged fourteen to sixteen) and sixteen 
adult women, the girls found social exclusion far more upsetting 
than the adults. The teenagers’ inability to regulate their distress 
played out in their brains. In a social brain area known to 
regulate negative feelings — the left ventrolateral PFC — neural 
activity was lower in teens than adults. Blakemore suggests 


[PDF page 127]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 115 
‘increased sensitivity to rejection in adolescence may result from 
reduced regulation of social distress’.!°* 
Teen brains are primed to like the same things as their 
friends, including music. In a paper called ‘Neural Mechanisms 
of the Influence of Popularity on Adolescent Ratings of Music’, 
a team from Emory University describes how they used fMRI 
to scan the brains of thirty-two twelve- to seventeen-year-olds 
while they listened to music and rated how much they liked each 
song. The first time the teens listened, they had no idea of the 
popularity of the song, but the second time around they were 
told a song’s tanking, and given the opportunity to change their 
own rating if they wanted to. As you might expect, teenagers 
were strongly influenced by a song’s popularity. Tellingly, they 
often altered their rating of a song after they were told how 
popular it was, to align their choice with others’. 
The fMRI scans revealed brain regions associated with 
anxiety and negative emotions were activated when the teens 
realised the music they liked was unpopular, what the authors 
call ‘mismatch anxiety’. Part of what drives a teenager’s need to 
‘fit in’ is the social anxiety they feel when they’re left out. When 
the teens changed their ratings to match and ‘fit in’ with their 
peers, their anxiety dissipated.'"” 
Why does rejection hurt so badly? 
When we feel rejected or left out, we use words like ‘hurt 
feelings’, ‘broken heart’ or ‘kicked in the guts’. And the loss of 
someone we love is almost certainly one of the most crushingly 
painful of life’s experiences. Why are negative social experiences 
so ‘painful’? 
One theory proposes that this is because physical pain and 
social pain shate similar neural networks. It makes sense that 
threats to social connection or feeling excluded utilise the same 


[PDF page 128]

116 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
pain signal that signifies threat to the physical body. Fitting in 
with a tribe is akin to survival. This theory finds support from 
fMRI studies and observations that the experience of physical 
pain can be lessened in the presence of social support.""” 
The notion that the two types of pain are neurologically 
similar has led to some unusual ideas about how to treat social 
pain, including using traditional painkillers. Opiates, best 
known for their pain-relieving effects, reduce separation anxiety 
in baby lab rats. And paracetamol alleviates social anxiety and 
feelings of rejection when playing Cyberball."" 
The idea that painkillers are ‘emotion relievers’ has started to 
catch on. Many-health professionals are understandably alarmed. 
The NHS in the UK has gone so far as to release a statement 
saying, ‘Don’t take paracetamol for painful emotions.’ And it 
should go without saying, the studies I’ve described here are not 
a green light for taking paracetamol or opiates to ‘treat’ feelings 
of loneliness, distress or emotional pain. 
The ‘emotional adolescent’ is 
developmentally normal 
Teenage girls are very emotional creatures. But not all teenage 
gitls experience ‘storm and stress’. When I was seventeen, my 
levels of anxiety during final-year high-school exams were so 
out of control I ended up at the family GP being treated for 
panic attacks. But the vast majority of my teen years were joyful, 
empowering and a whole lot of fun. 
Sarah Whittle is an associate professor of psychiatry at the 
University of Melbourne, where she specialises in adolescent 
brain development and resilience. Whittle explained to me that 
the emotional lives of teenage girls differ from adults because 
of the ‘developmental mismatch’ between their ‘tational PFC’ 


[PDF page 129]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 117 
and “emotional limbic brain’. ‘It’s still only a theory, she reminds 
me, ‘but the evidence is stacking up that hyperactivity of the 
limbic system is responsible for heightened emotional reactivity 
in adolescents. As the PFC matures, its ability to regulate the 
activity in subcortical structures improves.’ 
Learning to regulate emotions 
Being able to calmly assess and keep emotions in check is a 
crucial life skill. Emotional regulation lets us navigate changing 
social landscapes and foster mental wellbeing. One of the most 
effective ways to regulate your emotions is a technique called 
cognitive reappraisal. Cognitive reappraisal changes the way 
you interpret a situation, which in turn calms your hot-headed 
response. 
Imagine you're fourteen and walking up to the front door of a 
party. Inside you can hear all your girlfriends laughing hysterically. 
Your appraisal of the situation might be, “OMG! They’re laughing 
about me behind my back.’ That appraisal (correct or not) will likely 
trigger intense feelings of sadness and rejection, and might quickly 
be followed by the thought, “They hate me. I’m going home!’ 
A different way of thinking about the situation — the 
reappraisal — might be, ‘Sure, they’re laughing. Perhaps someone 
told a funny joke. Maybe I should go inside and find out.’ The 
reappraisal (correct or not) encourages you to consider different 
perspectives, and leads to a way of thinking that keeps a lid 
on emotional distress. Adults are much better at cognitive 
reapptaisal than children and teens. We’re more experienced 
with a range of social situations and better at deploying the 
thinking skills required. 
The neural basis of cognitive reappraisal is studied by 
eliciting negative emotions with provocative or distressing 
photos comprised of images that range from neutral (furniture 


[PDF page 130]

118 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
or landscapes) to horrific or exciting scenes (mutilated bodies or 
erotic nudes). Whittle’s research shows that teenage girls find 
the photos much mote emotionally disturbing or arousing 
than adults. In her lab, fMRI shows that deploying the skill of 
cognitive reappraisal activates a distributed cortical network 
including the PFC, which in turn down-regulates excitability in 
the limbic system. 
Emotional regulation skills don’t always magically appear as 
we mature, but they can be formally taught. Whittle coaches 
her teenage volunteers in cognitive reappraisal by encouraging 
them to think, “This isn’t real, it’s a scene from a movie’, or, 
‘The situation looks worse than it is’, or, ‘It could be a lot worse’, 
ot, ‘At least it is not me in that situation’.'!* 
ls mental illness emotional development gone wrong? 
One theme in adolescent brain research can be summed up by 
the phrase ‘moving parts get broken’. Because the teenage brain 
is undergoing such extensive remodelling, it’s thought that it’s 
easy for the wiring to go awry, predisposing girls to depression, 
anxiety and eating disorders. The emotional life of teenage girls 
is complex both inside and out. It’s clear that ‘inside’ hormones 
are fluctuating and neural networks are fine-tuning. But we tend 
to forget the dynamic shifts taking place ‘outside’. 
Many emotions girls experience are novel, especially those 
taking place in new social contexts. There is a first time for 
everything and that includes your first crush (especially if it’s 
unrequited), experience of jealousy, being left off the party 
invite list, and getting likes on Instagram. The newness of these 
experiences heightens their emotional impact. Sometimes this is 
positive — falling in love for the first time is pretty wonderful! 
Sometimes this is negative — being rejected by your first love is 
rather painful.'® 


[PDF page 131]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 119 
Girls’ preference for emotional intimacy increases during 
their early teenage yeats and intense ‘bosom buddy’ friendships 
form around the same time girls “break up’ with their families. 
This leaves girls potentially vulnerable if those friendships break 
down or ate less than ideal. Loss of friendship is a significant 
and overlooked potential cause of stress. 
While the ‘wrong’ friendships can lead teens astray, the 
‘right’ kinds of friends are powerful and protective. I had one 
such dear friend all through high school (we're still close now 
and I’ve called on her psychiatric training to inform sections of 
this book). While writing this chapter we talked about how our 
devoted friendship buffered us from the tumult so many of our 
peers experienced. We know the happiest teens aren’t the ones 
who have the most ‘friends’ on Instagram but the ones who have 
a few close supportive friendships, and sometimes that means 
having one terrific friend. 
Risk-taking and the mismatch 
between thinking and feeling 
One prevailing view is that because the brain is ‘undergoing 
renovation’ the impulsive teenager is more likely to engage in risky 
behaviours. They crash cars (if they're boys) or get pregnant (if 
they’re girls). Rightfully so, critics argue that this view is somewhat 
over-generalised and focuses on teenagers as ‘deviant risk-takers’. 
Sure, teenagers are more inclined towards risky behaviours 
than adults or children, but social adventure, sensation seeking 
and even blue hair and half-naked selfies ate not signs of 
delinquency. They’re a normal part of testing out new tribes and 
trying on new identities for size. 
It’s also worth pointing out that not all young people 
make ‘bad’ decisions, and not all risky behaviour leads to a 


[PDF page 132]

120 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
negative outcome; what might seem tame to one person might 
be perceived as highly reckless to another. The most deviant 
act I got up to during high school (I’m now less horrified at 
myself than I was at the time) was helping a friend break into a 
classtoom one weekend. She levered open a window, | hoisted 
her in and then stood guard. She’d forgotten her homework 
folder and didn’t want to turn up on Monday without it 
complete. Clearly, the prospect of unfinished homework was 
more threatening to us than the risk of being caught breaking 
and entering the school. 
7. Do girls take risks? 
The statistics are clear when it comes to male versus female 
harmful risk-taking. The Dunedin Study has found that boys 
and men disproportionately outnumber girls and women in 
risky behaviours such as using drugs, vandalism and theft." 
Young men ate more likely than young women to die in car 
accidents as a result of dangerous driving. And boys and men are 
mote likely to participate in adventure sports or win a Darwin 
Award — the posthumous award given annually to a person who 
has died doing something stupendously stupid. 
A 1999 meta-analysis of gender and risky behaviour found 
that males tend to take risks even when a risk is obviously a 
bad idea.'” The same analysis found the opposite was true 
for girls and women — we're less likely to take risks even in a 
fairly innocuous situation, including when it might even be a 
good idea to do so, such as intellectual risk-taking in exams or 
entrepreneurship. Sheryl Sandberg, COO of Facebook, has 
made famous the finding that men apply for a job when they 
meet only 60 per cent of the qualifications, but women apply 
only 1f they meet 100 per cent. Because of this difference (again, 
average differences, plenty of overlap), men and boys tend to 


[PDF page 133]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 121 
encounter more failure and, sadly, girls and women tend to 
experience less success. Sandberg is on to something. 
There are many social and cultural reasons for the differing 
propensity for risk, but the most popular theory is that the 
testosterone makes men risk-takers, and lack of testosterone 
makes women tisk-avoiders. By this point in the book you 
should automatically question such a simplistic ‘bottom-up 
biology trumps all notion. The data certainly don’t support 
it. Testosterone levels rarely predict a propensity for risk in 
a neat join-the-dots way. Curiously high and low levels of 
testosterone are correlated with risk aversion in men azd women 
(remember that the ovaries and female adrenal glands trickle 
out testosterone). As Cordelia Fine says, ‘rather than being a 
king who issues orders’, testosterone 1s just another voice in the 
crowd.!'6 
The imaginary audience — who is watching me? 
Part of being a successful tribe member and learning to be a 
good friend is developing the ability to read the emotions of 
others. Social emotions — such as guilt, embarrassment, shame 
and pride — require the specific ability to recognise someone 
else’s state of mind. That is, appreciating that someone else 
thinks and feels in a way different from yourself. 
We start to develop ‘theory of mind’, as it’s called, as very 
young children. The process of mentalising is even more 
sophisticated. It involves recognising the needs, desires, feelings, 
beliefs and reasons of others. Mentalising is one of the most 
complex tasks humans have to master. We see mastery emerge 
clearly in the behaviour of teenage girls as they become super- 
sensitive and worried about what others think about them. 
This can be positive. Many teenage girls are passionate 
adopters of social causes and volunteerism. But the increased 


[PDF page 134]

122 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
awareness of the minds of others at the same time as shifting 
away from the security of childhood provides a perfect storm 
for ‘the imaginary audience’. It’s worth noting that adolescent 
egocentrism is a normal part of development, but due to the 
petvasiveness of social media, girls are even more sensitive to 
what others think than those of us from older generations. The 
‘imaginary audience’ is a whole lot bigger and less imaginary 
than it was even a decade ago.'” 
‘It seemed like such a good idea at the time’ 1s a common 
excuse and reflects the simple fact that teenagers often make bad 
decisions because the potential feel-good reward outweighs the 
bad. What we’ve learned from research is that risky behaviour 
is driven mote by pleasure than by pain. Decision-making and 
risk-evaluation don’t happen in isolation. Both the emotional 
brain (feelings of reward and pleasure) and the social brain (peer 
influence) are involved. The reward 1s clear: tribe approval. 
A classic study published in the journal Developmental Psychology 
in 2005 was designed to measure whether teens really are more 
easily swayed to take risks in the presence of an audience. 
Researchers recruited 306 volunteers from three age groups: 
young teens (thirteen to sixteen), young adults (eighteen 
to twenty-two) and adults (twenty-four and older). Each 
volunteer was asked to bring along two close friends to watch 
them complete the challenge — a simulated driving game 
called Chicken. Chicken measures 1n-the-moment risk-taking 
and drivers ate rewarded based on how quickly they finish 
driving their car through a virtual town. For example, at some 
intersections the subjects ate faced with a decision: brake for 
the orange light or speed up (chance a crash) but complete the 
game faster. 
As you might expect, the youngest teens took significantly 
more tisks than the adults when their friends were watching 


[PDF page 135]

THE TEENAGE BRAIN 123 
them play. But here’s what was surprising: when they were 
driving ‘alone’ they took the same number of driving risks as 
older teens or adults. 
Clearly, young teenagers are perfectly capable of evaluating 
danger and making smart decisions — they can do it when they’re 
alone. ‘They just seem to lose theit minds in ‘hot’ situations. 
‘Hot cognition’ is a hypothesis that recognises that our thinking 
is influenced by our emotional state. Peer pressure or having an 
imaginary audience (your mum might have called it showing 
off) switches teens into “hot cognition’ mode." 
We all know that getting up to mischief with your friends 1s 
much more fun than going it alone. Tellingly, an fMRI version 
of the Chicken driving game found that the ventral striatum 
in the brain involved in motivation, pleasure and anticipation 
of reward was more strongly activated in teenagers when they 
were driving with friends versus driving alone. In teenagers 
subcortical dopamine pathways mature before the rational ‘why 
don’t you think it over’ PFC does. 
In the case of teenagers, driving too fast in cars gains 
approval of the tribe. For some teenage girls (myself included), 
peer approval might not come from driving fast. For me and my 
friends, getting homework in on time was the priority! Social 
context matters. Choose your friends wisely. 
Adolescence is a unique window 
of opportunity for education 
As we’ve seen, risk-taking is typically framed as undesirable. 
But at school taking a risk can be useful. “The adolescent brain 
is malleable and adaptable — this is an excellent opportunity 
119 for learning and creativity, writes Blakemore.'” Taking a risk 
by asking a question in class or providing an answer that goes 


[PDF page 136]

124 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
beyond the information in the textbooks is a vital skill that 
enables progress. 
Giedd agrees the new insights of adolescent neuroscience will 
encourage adolescents to challenge their brain with the kinds of 
skills that they want to excel at for the remainder of their lives. 
‘They have a matvellous opportunity to craft their own identity 
02 An adolescent’s success and to optimise their brain, he writes. 
in pursuing long-term academic, athletic or artistic goals, for 
example, typically requires motivation to practise the relevant 
skills and a desire to persevere through difficulties. Their brains 
are primed for success. 
It’s a rather lovely coincidence of modern life that girls are 
attending high school at the peak of their learning potential. 
The regions of the brain that are plastic and undergoing 
refinement ate the exact same regions involved in skills related to 
selective attention, reasoning, logic and memory. ‘Take learning 
mathematics. Moving from understanding basic arithmetic to 
the symbolic language of algebra, generalising, modelling and 
analysing equations needs abstract reasoning skills, logic, mental 
imagery and creative thinking. These are precisely the skills the 
teen brain is mastering and refining. 
Blakemore has commented that adolescence represents a period 
of brain development during which environmental experiences 
are crucial. “If early childhood ts seen as a major opportunity or a 
sensitive period for teaching, so too might adolescence.’'” 
The teenage yeats are a unique stage of enhanced plasticity 
and adaptability for the brain. ‘With increased opportunity 
comes increased vulnerability, Professor George Patton said 
to me. ‘Vulnerability goes hand in glove with opportunity.’ I, 
like many other researchers in the field, feel we should focus 
on the teenage years not as a time of storm and stress but of 
unparalleled opportunity for learning and creativity. 


[PDF page 137]

Depression and Anxiety 
My FIRST MINOR BRUSH WITH ANXIETY WAS AT AGE TEN WHEN I 
found myself in a perfect storm: the onset of puberty, a 
bout of glandular fever and a grandparent with cancer. ‘This 
culminated in what I’ve since self-diagnosed as childhood 
separation anxiety. My memories of 1985 aren’t so much of the 
sore throats, fatigue and weeks off school — rather, they’re fits 
of extreme anxiety based on the utter conviction that someone 
in my family was going to die. 
I'd spend the hours and even days in advance of Mum leaving 
the house in a state of cold prickling fear. Part of my disordered 
response when she did go out was to set off on little solo search 
parties. I remember two occasions when | climbed out a window 
in my pyjamas, and once walked out of school, ostensibly to save 
her from dying. 
My ‘fretting’, as we called it, was never dismissed, but being 
the mid-80s it wasn’t treated either. Today I might have visited 
a child psychologist for cognitive behavioural therapy or 
counselling. But as it happened, like many childhood difficulties, 
I eventually grew out of it. 
125 


[PDF page 138]

126 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
I experienced a second brush with anxiety at age seventeen. 
It wasn’t serious or long-lasting but the timing couldn’t have 
been worse. My susceptibility to anxiety (separation disorder 
increases the tisk of panic disorders during young adulthood) 
met with my belief that life began and ended with final-year 
high-school exams.'*” 
For the most part, my preparation went well. But the 
afternoon before my biology final I was sitting at my desk 
studying when I was overcome with a sense of impending doom, 
and cold fear that prickled up and down my spine. I felt oddly 
detached — I knew I was safe and I’d long grown out of worrying 
about Mum, but it was all very overwhelming. | started crying 
and couldn’t stop. With Mum’s help we threw everything we 
had at it: I closed the books, took a long walk, had a nice meal 
and a good night’s sleep, but when I sat down in the exam hall 
the next morning, the doom and fear slammed into me again 
and I ran from the hall. When Mum took me to our lovely GP, 
he expressed genuine surprise. He’d never before seen exam- 
related anxiety in a teenage girl. 
Twenty-five years later, and a survey of 722 Year 12 students 
from a range of schools in Sydney, Australia, found four out of 
ten reported high-level anxiety symptoms, high enough to be 
of clinical concern. Another study, published in The Lancet in 
2014, found half of girls and almost one third of boys have an 
episode of depression or anxiety in their teenage years.'?! 
Whichever way you look at it, rates of depression and 
anxiety afe rising, some due to more awareness (celebrities 
and even royalty are increasingly opening up about their own 
mental illnesses) and improved data collection, but also due to 
the stressors of twenty-first-century life. I doubt there would 
be a GP today who has never before seen a teenage girl with 
anxiety. 


[PDF page 139]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 127 
Why is there a gender gap in 
depression and anxiety? 
For every three cases of depression, two occur in women. 
Anxiety shares a similar statistic. 
During childhood and early puberty the rates of depression 
ate very similar between boys and girls. From puberty onwards 
a gender gap appeats and remains well into old age. Women 
and men also report different types and intensity of symptoms. 
Compared to men, women with depression ate mote likely to 
report loss of appetite and sleepiness, low energy, fatigue and pain. 
The adult males of our species suffer from depression too, 
but they’re slightly more likely to be diagnosed with what are 
called “externalising disorders’ such as drug and alcohol abuse, 
violence or aggression.'** Girls and women tend to develop 
what are called ‘internalising’ disorders and often for the first 
time around adolescence. These include panic disorder, phobias, 
social anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and 
eating disorders, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Once again, it is worth reminding you these are average differences 
and there is plenty of overlap between the sexes. 
If women ate more vulnerable than men to depression and 
anxiety, the obvious question to ask is: Why? 
Hold on tight — the answer to this is complex because multiple 
interacting bottom-up, outside-in and top-down elements are 
responsible. 
In a 2016 Lancet Psychiatry seties on women’s mental health, 
Christine Kuehner, a professor of clinical psychology and 
psychotherapy at the University of Heidelberg in Mannheim, 
Germany, identified the following causes for the gender gap in 
depression:'* 


[PDF page 140]

128 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Genes and sex hormones. 
On) Women’s dampened stress response. 
2 Women’s lower self-esteem and higher tendency for body 
shame and rumination. 
Q Higher rates of experienced violence and childhood sexual 
abuse. 
Q Lack of gender equality and discrimination. 
Depression — the basics 
Feeling sad or lacklustre from time to time is part of being 
human. Sometimes symptoms are mild and caused by poor 
lifestyle choices, and can be treated with vigorous walking, a 
healthier diet and a good night’s sleep. Other times depression is 
deep and dark, has no apparent cause, the intensity of symptoms 
is setiously distressing and unmanageable, and it needs 
professional treatment. I like to explain it by saying depression 
comes in many shades of blue. 
If you've never suffered from depression, but would like to 
peer into the mind of someone who has, set aside half an hour 
to watch Andrew Solomon’s 2013 TED talk ‘Depression, the 
secret we share’. 
Solomon, a professor of clinical psychology at Columbia 
University, says, ‘day to day life simply became hard work. I 
would decide I should have lunch and then I would think, Bw 
Id have to get the food out and put it on a plate and cut it up and chew it 
and swallow it, and it felt to me like the Stations of the Cross.’ He 
says what often gets lost in descriptions of depression is your 
residual self-awareness about the undesirability of your mental 
state. “Yet you are nonetheless in its grip and you are unable to 
figure out any way around it.” 


[PDF page 141]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 129 
Beyondblue summarises the key symptoms of depression as: 
? Behaviours such as not going out anymore, withdrawing 
from family and friends, relying on alcohol and sedatives, 
and not doing usual enjoyable activities. 
Q Feeling overwhelmed, irritable, lacking in confidence, 
indecisive, miserable or sad. 
2 Thoughts such as ‘I’m a failure.’ ‘Nothing good ever 
happens to me.’ ‘Life’s not worth living” ‘People would be 
better off without me.’ 
2 Physical symptoms such as feeling tired all the time, sleep 
problems, change of appetite, weight loss or gain.'*4 
Anxiety — the basics 
Anxiety and depression often go hand in hand. They can occur 
simultaneously and reinforce one another, or one can lead to the 
other. Roughly half of people diagnosed with depression will 
meet the criteria for anxiety. 
Anxiety is the most common mental health condition 
globally.’ One in three women and one in five men will 
experience anxiety at some point in their lives. 
Anxiety stems from the abnormal regulation of fear. Fear is a 
complex mind—body response to a perceived threat. We evolved 
fear to stay safe, so feelings of fear enable us to fight or flee and 
sutvive danger. When fear persists, or is out of proportion to 
the reality of the threat, and gets in the way of you living your 
life, you may have an anxiety disorder. 
Beyondblue points out that the symptoms of anxiety often 
develop slowly over time and, given we all experience worry 
of anxiousness at vatious points in our lives, it can be hard to 
know how much is too much. Looking back on my biology 


[PDF page 142]

130 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
exam panic attack, this rings true. My anxiety was stealthy and 
by the time I was in the throes of the panic attack it was too late 
to do anything about it.'”° 
There are a few different types of anxiety disorder that you 
could be formally diagnosed with, including generalised anxiety, 
phobias, separation anxiety and panic disorder. Obsessive 
compulsive disorder and PTSD are two other conditions where 
anxiety is prominent. 
While each anxiety condition has its own unique features, 
beyondblue summarises some common symptoms as: 
2 Behaviours such as avoidance of situations that make you 
feel anxious which can impact on study, work or social life. 
Q Feelings and thoughts such as excessive fear, worry, 
catastrophising, or obsessive thinking. 
Q Physical symptoms such as panic attacks, hot and 
cold flashes, racing heart, tightening of the chest, quick 
breathing, restlessness, or feeling tense, wound up and edgy. 
Enduring mental wellbeing is rare 
Mental health statistics get sliced, diced and interpreted in 
multiple ways, and rarely make for good news. So, who exactly 
is most at risk? Teens? LGBTI people? Middle-aged men? New 
mothersr Indigenous people? The elderly? 
Dare I suggest all of us? 
Experiencing a mental health condition at some point during 
the first half of your life is the norm, not the exception. People 
whose lives remain free from mental disorder are, in fact, 
remarkably rare. 
This rather startling finding comes from the Dunedin Study, 
in which Richie Poulton and colleagues found that eighty-three 


[PDF page 143]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 131 
per cent of people experience some form of mental illness by 
the age of forty. Less than one in five of us experience enduring 
mental wellbeing.'”’ 
Poulton and his colleagues write: ‘readers may reasonably 
doubt the claim that the experience of diagnosable mental 
disorder is near universal.’ Because their claim is so astonishing, 
and you may be doubtful too, it’s worth spending time looking 
at how the finding came about. 
Mental health statistics are often drawn from a particular 
population at a given point in time. For example, ‘Danish people 
who teceived treatment in a psychiatric setting between 2000 
and 2012’, or “lhe one in fourteen of Australians aged four to 
seventeen who experienced an anxiety disorder in 2015°.'*° 
Furthermore, cases can only be counted if they’re reported, 
and because plenty of people never seek treatment, their 
medical records are incomplete or inaccurate. Sometimes 
studies rely on asking people to remember if they’ve ever 
suffered from depression, and they forget. Asking people to 
recall events from decades earlier is a notoriously unreliable way 
to gather health histories. Issues with bias and reporting mean 
that estimates of mental illness are usually lower than actuality. 
Because investigations such as the Dunedin Study meet and 
interview participants repeatedly over decades, there are fewer 
cracks for the data to fall into. Dunedin Study members have 
been visiting the centre every few years since they were born. 
At ages eleven, thirteen, fifteen, eighteen, twenty-one, twenty- 
six, thirty-two and thirty-eight, mental health specialists have 
evaluated members for symptoms of eleven common diagnoses 
including anxiety, depression, schizophrenia, substance abuse, 
attention deficit disorder and P'T'SD. 
Of the 988 members, eighty-three per cent met the criteria 
for a mental health diagnosis at one or two visits up to age forty. 


[PDF page 144]

132 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Only seventeen per cent were ‘completely psychiatrically healthy’ at 
every visit. 
To be honest, I found this finding both thrilling and 
depressing, It finally made sense why mental health campaigns 
such as R U OK? Day strike a chord, or why many people find 
mindfulness and meditation useful. At the same time, I couldn’t 
get my head around the idea that we should consider mental 
illness as ‘normal’. Does this needlessly pathologise the shades 
of blue we all experiencer 
I talked over the findings with Poulton, who proposes we 
consider an episode of mental disorder similarly to how we’d 
consider a bad-case of flu, kidney stones or a broken bone — all 
serious but recoverable conditions that are highly prevalent and 
may need medical attention or time to heal. 
Rather than there be cause for concern around overdiagnosis 
and overmedicalisation of mental illness, Poulton hopes his 
findings reduce stigma and victim blaming. ‘People who are 
mentally ill really get crapped on by society, he said candidly. 
“We can talk as much as we like about mental health and mental 
illness in the media, but the stigma remains for many people, 
who then fail to ask for help,’ 
As expected, the healthy seventeen per cent came from 
childhood backgrounds virtually free of the well-known 
predictors of poor mental health such as childhood abuse, 
poverty or illness. These childhood predictors were common in 
the group who experienced mote severe cases of schizophrenia, 
mania ot PTSD. 
A key comparison in the study was between the healthy 
seventeen per cent and those who experienced mild bouts of 
anxiety or depression — they were no more of less likely to 
come from early childhood adversity or trauma. The difference 
between the two groups was childhood temperament, and a 


[PDF page 145]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 133 
telative absence of family psychiatric history. The seventeen 
pet cent scored low on Poulton’s marker, ‘negative emotional 
reactivity. As children they had few emotional difficulties, 
lots of friends and showed superior levels of willpower or self- 
control. “You'd never describe these kids as loners, frequent 
wotriers, sad or tearful) he said. 
You might wonder, does enduring mental health matter? Have 
the seventeen per cent won a wellbeing lottery? 
As you might expect, the seventeen per cent went on 
to achieve more ‘desirable’ life outcomes — they stayed 
in education longer, landed better-paying jobs, and had 
higher-quality relationships (they rated respect and fairness, 
emotional intimacy and trust, and open communication in 
their relationships as high). They’d be the type of people the 
psychology literature would describe as ‘flourishing’. This study 
draws a nice parallel to other reports of rare physical health, 
such as centenarians who manage to live to 100 years or older 
with unusually enduring physical health. 
Clearly there is a strong advantage gained in life by those 
who escape even transient mild issues with depression and 
anxiety. Such advantage starts in childhood and snowballs 
with age. The role of abundant social support in childhood 
to buffer against adversity cannot be underestimated. Poulton 
points out that human bonds formed at any stage of life can 
be transformative, and there is always the potential for warm, 
benevolent relationships later in life to repair the damage done 
in childhood. 
What does a depressed brain look like? 
There’s no blood test or biological markers for depression or 
anxiety. A psychiatrist friend of mine explained to me that she 


[PDF page 146]

134 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
diagnoses depression based on what people tell her about their 
feelings, how they’te behaving and what they’re thinking. 
Could a brain scan diagnose depression, or predict who 
might become depressed in the future? 
Data compiled from brain scans of many thousands 
of people with depression collected by the international 
consortium ENIGMA identified a few key abnormalities in the 
structure and operation of depressed brains.’*? ENIGMA was 
set up to promote collaboration between disparate research 
groups all working on the same problem. Their simple aim is 
to obtain the large sample sizes necessary to detect what are 
often tiny differences between healthy and unhealthy brains. 
The depression research arm of ENIGMA is led by Lianne 
Schmaal, who tells me this is the largest coordinated worldwide 
meta-analysis of brain structure changes in people with 
depression. ‘Now we have robust and reliable evidence for the 
small and subtle differences that exist, she says. 
So far Schmaal’s team has crunched the numbers for the 
effects of depression on subcortical structures and cortical 
grey matter; the white matter data is still being processed. A 
comparison of 1728 people with depression and 7199 healthy 
controls found adults with recurrent depression had an ever so 
slightly shrunken hippocampus. The hippocampus is an area of 
the brain responsible for emotion processing and forming new 
memories. Hippocampal ‘shrinkage’ (a term Schmaal doesn’t 
like using) was most pronounced among those people whose 
depression started in their teenage yeats. 
People with depression also had an ever-so-slightly smaller 
amygdala, although the difference wasn’t as noticeable as 
hippocampal shrinkage. Involvement of the amygdala in 
depression should come as no surprise — it is intimately involved 
in processing emotions, especially fear. 


[PDF page 147]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 135 
Schmaal’s second study examined the cortical grey matter of 
2148 depressed people and 7957 healthy controls from twenty 
sites around the world. Adults with depression had an ever- 
so-slightly thinner cortex (specifically in orbitofrontal cortex, 
cingulate, insula and temporal lobes) compared to healthy 
controls. A key feature of these regions is their close interaction 
with the amygdala and hippocampus. 
Do depressed people have brain structures that tend to be 
‘shrunken’ or thinner to begin with, or does depression cause 
the damage? Some ENIGMA teseatchers propose that it’s likely 
depression causes the shrinkage, as shrinkage was only present 
in people with long-lasting or severe depression, not those with 
a one-off episode or milder cases. 
Do depressed brains work 
differently from healthy brains? 
People with depression tend to have detectable differences in the 
electrical activity in certain parts of their brain. In particular, 
levels of neural activity in the PFC and amygdala sometimes 
differ between healthy and depressed people. 
In healthy adults, top-down PFC modulation of the amygdala 
keeps emotions in check. Brain imaging studies show that with 
depression the PFC is /ess active and the amygdala are over active 
compared to normal. People with depression have what can be 
thought of as a ‘trigger-happy’ amygdala.’”” 
A trigger-happy amygdala that overreacts to negative 
emotional stimuli fits with the theory (just one of many) that 
depressed people look at their world with a strong negative 
emotional bias. Rather than the rose-tinted glasses through 
which an optimist would view the world, someone with 
depression sees the world in shades of grey. 


[PDF page 148]

136 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
The dysfunctional dialogue between the limbic system and 
PFC is seen in both depressed adult women and in teenage 
gitls. One reason that teens have a tendency to get depressed 
is because the lines of communication between the PFC and 
limbic system are still developing. 
To be cleat, we’re not able to diagnose depression by scanning 
someone’s brain (especially if they've not been depressed for 
long). Differences detected by ENIGMA were so subtle they 
could only be spotted when many thousands of scans wete 
combined. Just as we cannot tell if you’re a man or a woman by 
yout MRI, we cannot tell if you’re depressed or not either. 
Lianne Schmaal tells me that her research shows what 
neuroscience calls ‘neural correlates’ of depression and that ‘t 
is not a diagnostic tool’. She hopes her data will eventually be 
able to predict if someone with depression or anxiety would 
respond to a particular antidepressant, or to a talking therapy. 
Is depression caused by a chemical 
imbalance in the brain? 
Let’s zoom in and look at depressed and anxious brains under a 
microscope. 
In his TED talk Andrew Solomon describes his experiences 
with antidepressants. People ask him if his ‘happy pills’ make 
him feel happy. They don’t make him ‘feel happy’ he says. ‘But 
I don’t feel sad about having to eat lunch, and I don’t feel sad 
about my answering machine, and I don’t feel sad about taking 
a shower.’!* 
Antidepressant drugs are one of the most widely used 
treatments for depression. There is considerable evidence they 
work well for some adults with severe depression. For other 
adults, particularly those with mild to moderate depression, 


[PDF page 149]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 137 
they tend to work no better than a placebo. In this instance, 
psychological treatments and lifestyle changes such as regular 
vigorous exercise may be just as effective.'*! 
Modern antidepressants are thought to work on a trio of brain 
chemicals called the monoamines: serotonin, noradrenaline 
and dopamine. Serotonin is involved in mood and emotion, 
noradrenaline is involved in stress and attention, and dopamine 
tells us what we want and is involved in motivation and reward. 
The idea that monoamines might have something to do with 
depression emerged back in the 1950s. Doctors noticed that 
reserpine, a chemical derived from the rauwolfia plant, widely 
used in India to treat high blood pressure, caused depression. 
Reserpine blocks the initial packaging up of monoamines into 
vesicles for release at synapses. It was reasoned that depression 
must be due to too little monoamine being packaged for release. 
Support for this idea came from another discovery that drugs 
that slow breakdown of released monoamines in the synapse 
cuted depression 1n some people. 
A seemingly logical hypothesis thus emerged: depression ts 
due to a deficiency of one or more monoamines. If you increase 
monoamine levels (with drugs), you’ll cure depression. 
SSRIs are one type of antidepressant that block the action of 
the molecule serotonin transport protein (SERT) in the synapse. 
Neurons tun rather economical electrochemical enterprises: 
once they release their chemical packages of serotonin into the 
synapse, SERT acts like a mini vacuum cleaner, immediately 
sucking serotonin back up into the neuron from which it was 
released. This simultaneously terminates serotonin’s effect and 
enables it to be repackaged and re-used. SSRIs act rather like a 
large wad of paper clogging up the SERT vacuum cleaner hose, 
pteventing the reuptake of serotonin. The longer serotonin 
lingers in the synapse, the stronger its effect. 


[PDF page 150]

138 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
It is important to note that while SSRIs make all the 
difference in the world for many people, they don’t work for 
everyone. This is one of many puzzles and weaknesses in the 
‘depression as a biochemical imbalance’ hypothesis. 
Another puzzle is the time lag between treatment and 
symptom improvement. Antidepressants act in the brain to 
increase monoamine levels pretty much the day you pop the 
first pill. But changes in mood (if they occur at all) take two or 
three weeks to kick in. 
Bearing in mind we can’t yet measure neurotransmitter levels 
in the brains of living humans (all our data comes from lab 
animals), we’re in the dark about how much monoamine levels 
need to change to alter mood. Curiously, a drug called tianeptine 
that enhances the action of SERT, thereby lowering serotonin 
levels, has been used as a treatment for depression. 
Another criticism of the chemical imbalance hypothesis is 
that it treats depression as a purely brain chemical problem, 
and fails to recognise there are biological, psychological, social 
and spiritual causes. But ve never been convinced this criticism 
is valid — research into genes, inflammation, social isolation and 
stress as causes of depression is well established. Neuroscience is 
far more broad ranging than critics assume! 
Of interest to readers will be that serotonin acts somewhat 
differently in women and men. Women manufacture less 
serotonin than men and have fewer serotonin receptors. And 
some (but not all) studies have found that SSRIs are more 
effective among women than among men.’ Sex differences in 
serotonin emerge at puberty and disappear among the elderly, 
suggesting a role for reproductive hormones. 
Experiments in male and female rodents have shown ovarian 
hormones alter levels of electrical activity in serotonergic 


[PDF page 151]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 139 
neurons. Oestrogen and progesterone alter serotonin synthesis, 
breakdown and removal from the synapse. 
Clearly, treating depression has proven way more difficult than 
simply increasing serotonin levels by blocking neurotransmitter 
reuptake. Altered levels of monoamines may not necessarily be 
the cause any more than a smaller than normal hippocampus 
is the cause of depression. Rather, biochemical signatures may be 
another ‘neural correlate’ of depression. 
Is there a gene for depression? 
Twins share parents, the womb and a childhood home, and 
identical twins share 100 per cent of their DNA. Studies 
of identical and fraternal twins are often used to assess how 
much genes versus environment matters, and such studies 
have shown the genetic risk of developing clinical depression is 
about forty per cent. That leaves another sixty per cent due to 
other outside-in or top-down causes. 
Gene-environment (GxE) studies investigate whether our 
genes moderate our susceptibility to experiences such as 
stressful life events. 
Poulton likes to explain GxE interactions using his finding 
that cannabis hikes schizophrenia risk in certain people. People 
with a particular variation of the gene ‘COMT” (G) who used 
cannabis during adolescence (E) are eleven times more likely to 
go on to develop schizophrenia than people without the gene. 
The COMT gene, which its found in only twenty-five per cent 
of the population, confers vulnerability to developing psychosis 
but ov/y if you use cannabis during your adolescent years. The 
seventy-five per cent of people without the gene don’t experience 
the same dramatically increased risk, nor do those with the gene 


[PDF page 152]

140 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
who smoke cannabis in adulthood. (‘If you want to smoke weed, 
wait till you’re an adult, is his sage advice.)'” 
GxE interactions have been used to explain the genetic 
differences between dandelion and orchid children. Recall in 
chapter 2 I introduced the idea that some children are more 
resilient and others more vulnerable to stress. Unlike their 
robust resilient dandelion peers, orchid children and the highly 
sensitive adults they grow into are less resilient. Orchids have 
the potential for either weakness or flourishing depending on 
how they’re nurtured.’”* 
Just as the COMT gene confers vulnerability to psychosis 
under very spéeific circumstances, a variation of an ‘orchid gene’ 
is thought to increase susceptibility to depression in response to 
extreme stress. Surprisingly, the orchid gene is the very same 
gene that codes for SERT — the serotonin mini vacuum cleaner 
blocked by SSRIs. 
We inherit different lengths of the SERT gene from our 
parents. You might inherit two longs, two shorts, or a long 
and a short copy. SERT is dose dependent — having one or 
two copies of short SERT doesn’t guarantee depression, but 
if you're exposed to stress or trauma you're far more likely 
to get depressed than the resilient people who inherited two 
long copies. 
SERT is now one of the most well-studied genes in mental 
health. Short SERT copies are implicated in everything from 
depression to neuroticism, to having a ‘trigger-happy’ amygdala, 
to blushing and social anxiety. 
The Dunedin Study found that people with short SERT copies 
were more likely to be depressed and even become suicidal if, 
and only if — they were exposed to a stressful event or childhood 
maltreatment. People with short SERT who were not exposed 
to severe stress displayed exceptional resilience.’ 


[PDF page 153]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 141 
Of course, science is never so neat and tidy — the case of 
SERT and genetic sensitivity to stress has proven conttoversial. 
A meta-analysis published while I was writing this chapter 
failed to replicate the early studies implicating short SERT as 
the go-between for stress and depression. The study included a 
whopping 43 165 subjects and was a collaborative effort between 
multiple groups that, like ENIGMA, ate dedicated to sharing 
existing data to improve the reliability of research findings.'*° 
Incidentally, the mega meta-analysis did find strong evidence 
for two risk factors for developing depression: being female and 
life stress. Looks like we’re back to where we started. 
Is the depression gender gap 
due to sex hormones? 
Clearly being a woman increases risk of depression. Who is 
going to argue with a meta-analysis of 43165 subjects? Does 
this mean we’re back to blaming our hormones? 
Oestrogen may improve mood 
It often comes as a surprise to learn that oestrogen promotes 
brain health and improves mood. Clinical studies indicate that our 
mental health 1s most fragile when oestrogen levels are dwindling, 
both over the course of the month and the course of the lifespan. 
For example, women have a lower incidence of schizophrenia 
compared to men before the age of forty-five. After age forty- 
five, twice as many women as men are diagnosed. High levels of 
oestrogen in young fertile women are thought to delay the onset 
of the disease.'*” 
Such episodes are rare, but sudden withdrawal of oestrogen 
can cause psychosis in women who have just given birth, which 
is when oestogen levels drop 1000-fold. And psychotic episodes 


[PDF page 154]

142 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
are reported in women being treated with the breast cancer drug 
tamoxifen, which blocks the action of oestrogen.'*’ 
Less dramatically, we’ve seen that blunting our natural 
oestrogen levels with the contraceptive pill dampens vitality, 
wellbeing and positive mood, and low levels of oestrogen are 
also blamed for the symptoms of PMDD. 
Rodent studies have found that oestrogen promotes 
neuronal sprouting, enhances synaptic plasticity and increases 
axon myelination. Oestrogen acts as an antiinflammatory, an 
antioxidant, slows neuronal cell death, and improves cerebral 
blood flow and glucose metabolism. Furthermore, oestrogen 
modulates the activity of the brain’s own chemical fertiliser, brain- 
derived neurotrophic factor. 
If our mental health is so clearly vulnerable to withdrawal 
of oestrogen, does this mean there 1s a place for oestrogen 
replacement as a therapy? 
Jayashtt Kulkarni believes so. Kulkarni has conducted 
trials and found that women with schizophrenia being treated 
with antipsychotics who receive additional doses of oestrogen 
via a skin patch improve faster than women who only take 
antipsychotics. Kulkarni is so convinced about the positive 
effects of oestrogen that instead of blaming ‘hormones’ on 
mood, she likes to say, ‘Isn’t she doing well because of her 
hormones. Maybe we should give them to him!’"* 
Progesterone may exacerbate anxiety and PTSD 
Of course, in healthy, naturally cycling women, oestrogen 
doesn’t work alone. Rising levels of oestrogen precede and then 
overlap with rising levels of progesterone and it can be difficult 
to draw conclusions about the exact role of each hormone (one 
good reason why studies of the menstrual cycle and the pill are 
so hard to decipher). 


[PDF page 155]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 143 
To help unpack the role of ovarian hormones in depression 
and anxiety, I met up with clinical psychologist and University 
of New South Wales (UNSW) neuroscientist Bronwyn Graham. 
Graham runs a progtam where she combines traditional 
laboratory research in rodents with clinical work in humans. 
Graham told me she started her research career as a ‘typical 
neuroscientist’, only studying male rats because females with 
their fluctuating hormones added too much ‘noise’ to the data. 
She also admitted to thinking sex difference research was ‘lazy 
science’. Curiosity eventually got the better of her and she 
realised that rather than dismissing the variance female rats 
introduced to data, it might be more interesting to shift her 
focus to studying the ‘noise’ itself. 
Lucky for us, because Graham’s research has shown 
hormonal fluctuations influence women’s susceptibility to 
anxiety in response to stress and vulnerability to PTSD.’ 
PTSD is a particular set of reactions that can develop 
in people who have been through a traumatic event which 
threatens their life or safety or that of others around them. This 
could be a car ot other serious accident, assault, or disasters 
such as a bushfire or flood. As a result, the people experience 
feelings of intense fear, helplessness or horror.'*° Compared to 
males, girls and women are twice as likely to develop PTSD 
after experiencing a traumatic incident. 
As I drove to meet Graham in late May 2017, news filtered 
through on my car radio of a terrorist attack on a pop concert 
in Manchester, England. Over coffee our discussion inevitably 
turned to the trauma trajectory the girls and young women at 
the concert would then be facing. 
Graham explained to me that after an horrific event like a 
terrorist attack, the vast majority of people experience some 
post-traumatic symptoms. For example, girls who were at 


[PDF page 156]

144 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
the concert in Manchester would be doing their best to avoid 
thinking about the event, but at the same time they'd be having 
unwanted and recurring memories, often in the form of vivid 
images and nightmares. ‘lhey’d be having intense emotional or 
physical reactions, such as sweating, heart palpitations or panic; 
they’d be jumpy and hyper alert, would have trouble sleeping 
and feel emotionally numb. Over time, about eighty to ninety 
pet cent spontaneously recover. Who develops full-blown 
PTSD depends on life history, previous mental health problems, 
genetic vulnerability and the availability of social support. 
Intriguingly, menstrual cycle phase at the time of trauma may 
facilitate the development of PTSD. It’s becoming increasingly 
apparent that sex hormones interact with stress hormones to 
affect our response to trauma.'*” 
Graham hypothesises that trauma coinciding with 
premenstrual low oestrogen and high progesterone contributes 
to a more deeply encoded memory of the event. Memory over- 
consolidation, as it is called, is thought to generate unwanted 
or distressing intrustve memories of trauma. Recall in chapter 4 
that we looked at research showing emotional memories 
tended to be more durable during the low-oestrogen and high- 
progesterone luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. 
Oestrogen, as we know, 1s protective and around ovulation 
it reduces anxiety. In girls and women with high (versus low) 
oestrogen at the time of the trauma, fear extinction is more 
likely. Fear extinction is when the scary memories gradually 
become less upsetting and intrusive over time. Two other 
studies support Graham’s intriguing hypothesis. 
In one study, 138 women who were admitted to Westmead 
Hospital in Sydney, Australia, following a traumatic accident 
(most admissions were from car accidents, but also falls and 
non-sexual assaults) were assessed for PTSD symptoms, 


[PDF page 157]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 145 
including flashbacks. Hormone levels were inferted by asking 
women when they got their last period. Women were mote 
likely to experience flashback memories if they were in the 
high-progesterone luteal phase of their cycle at the time of 
trauma. One in five (twenty-two per cent) of women in the 
luteal phase experienced flashback memories compared to less 
than one in ten (nine per cent) who were in another phase of 
theit-cycle,’ 
A second study published in the Journal of Forensic Nursing 
followed up 111 sexual-assault survivors six months after their 
trauma. The researchers found that those who had taken an 
emetgency contraceptive (also known as the morning after pill) 
ot who were already taking the pill showed fewer symptoms of 
PTSD." Similar findings from other groups have also shown 
the pill blunts women’s responses to psychosocial stress.'* 
As Graham explains, both forms of contraception suppress 
women’s natural levels of progesterone, thereby diminishing 
memory overconsolidation and intrusive memories. 
As fascinating as these findings on hormones and PTSD are, 
like much work on the interaction between the pill and the brain, 
research is pre-pubertal. It’s difficult to translate the findings on 
menstrual cycle phase, oral contraceptive use and development of 
PTSD or anxiety into real-world advice. For example, we simply 
cannot recommend the pill as a ‘vaccine’ against P'TSD. 
Bronwyn Graham 1s well aware of this and told me that when 
she puts on her clinical psychologist hat she doesn’t focus on the 
myriad reasons why she has a patient under her care. Rather, she 
focuses on helping that person get better. “I often say to people 
that if you go to hospital with a broken leg, the doctors don’t 
spend hours trying to figure out how and why you fell out of 
a tree. They spend time looking at the break and how it can be 
fixed, she said. ‘It’s the same with mental health.’ 


[PDF page 158]

146 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
The inner mean girl 
Few of us would consider speaking to our friends, children or 
even pets in the same way we speak to ourselves. Negative self- 
talk contributes to the gender gap in depression — the voice is 
louder and meaner in girls and women than in boys and men. 
I found one line of research on early puberty and depression 
particularly interesting, because it looked at the propensity for 
girls to ruminate — that is, to ‘overthink’ or mentally chew over 
intense emotional experiences, and their possible causes and 
consequences; rather than coming up with proactive solutions. 
Rumination is a well-known risk factor for depression and 
leads to hopelessness, pessimism and self-criticism. Gender 
differences in the tendency to guilt and shame oneself emerge, 
as you might expect, during adolescence, when they are 
especially focused on body dissatisfaction. 
There is a saying that worrying is like a rocking chair: it 
will give you something to do, but it won't get you anywhere. 
Teenage girls, especially, get caught in a trap when they find 
a Close friend to co-ruminate with. Such friendships have the 
benefits of promoting emotional closeness, but discussing, 
rehashing and speculating about problems together can stress 
girls out even more thereby exacerbating depression. 
Another top-down mediator of depression is personality. 
Psychologists measure what they call the Big Five personality 
traits: openness, conscientiousness, extroversion, agreeableness 
and neuroticism. Each trait is a continuum and describes your 
tendencies, habits of thought and ways of relating to others and 
the world. Someone who scores high on negative emotionality 
or neuroticism would typically be anxious, highly strung, tense, 
nervy and prone to stewing over things, versus someone who is 


[PDF page 159]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 147 
emotionally stable and doesn’t react to stress. Compare the cool, 
calm, detached indifference of James Bond versus the anxious 
and nervy George Costanza character.!”” 
The Dunedin Study has found that young adults who score 
low on traits of conscientiousness and agreeableness, and high 
on neuroticism, are more prone to developing depression. 
Depression is a stress-related disorder 
You may have noticed that in each of the preceding sections the 
unifying theme (besides being female) is stress. It could be said 
that nature (in the form of genes or hormones or personality or 
social support or biological sex) loads the bullet and stress fires 
the gun. 
How does a stressful event get under our skin? 
We all respond to stress in a variety of ways, and whether 
an event is a ‘stressor’ varies from person to person. What I 
may perceive as relatively benign might be construed as very 
threatening to you and elicit a biological stress response and 
vice versa. | remember visiting my family in Christchurch in 
the days following the massive September 2010 earthquake, 
which occurred in the middle of the night. I was sitting on the 
couch with my sister one evening as she described feeling deeply 
unsettled and frightened as it grew dark. Despite knowing 
earthquakes were no more likely to occur at night than in the 
day, in her hypervigilant state, darkness was a new stressor. 
We feel stressed when real or imagined pressures exceed 
our perceived ability to cope. A major factor in dealing with 
stress is having access to practical, social or emotional resources 
to prop you up. Sometimes it’s not so much the actual event 
itself but how it makes us feel and for how long we feel helpless 


[PDF page 160]

148 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
afterwards. Problems arise when we’re repeatedly stressed or 
stressed for prolonged periods. 
How exactly does a stressor act to elicit a biological response 
that leads to depression? ‘[o understand, we'll need to take 
a closer look at how our stress response works and how it 
integrates body and brain. 
The neurobiology of stress 
There are two biological pathways that work together to mediate 
the stress response: the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and 
the HPA axis. These two systems exist 1n our bodies to maintain 
physiological‘balance or, as scientists say, homeostasis. 
The SNS is the front-line ‘fight or flight’ responder and 
activates the adrenal medulla of the adrenal glands, which sit like 
little berets on top of the kidneys. The adrenal medulla release 
adrenaline and noradrenaline into the bloodstream, fuelling our 
ability to ‘fight’ or ‘flee’. 
The HPA axis is slower to respond but 1s longer lasting. 
The HPA axis consists of the hypothalamus, the pituitary 
and the adrenal cortex, which is where cortisol — perhaps one of 
our most maligned and misunderstood of hormones — 1s made. 
Cortisol has an undeserved bad reputation. I find it useful 
to think of cortisol as the Goldilocks hormone. You need just 
the right amount — too little or too much and you have health 
problems. Like all hormones, cortisol is merely a key to unlock a 
door. The lock is the glucocorticoid receptor. How cortisol acts 
depends on glucocorticoid receptors, especially their numbers 
and where they’re located. The receptors mediate HPA-axis 
negative feedback, that is, the ability of cortisol to inhibit its 
own secretion. 
In some people with depression, malfunctioning glucocorticoid 
receptors cause the HPA-axis to become over-active resulting 


[PDF page 161]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 149 
in excessive cortisol flooding the body and brain. This is called 
‘glucocorticoid resistance’. 
In other groups of depressed people the HPA-axis is wnder- 
active. Women make up a large proportion of this group. 
Compared to men, our sttess response is slightly blunted. As 
you might expect, the HPA and HPO axes are interconnected. 
We know that a stress-induced activation of the HPA-axis slows 
oestrogen production and, in turn, oestrogen can enhance 
HPA-axis responses.'*° 
Sex differences in the stress response emerge at puberty. One 
explanation for the rise in depression rates in teenage girls is the 
maturation of the interconnected female HPA and HPO axes. 
Dutch researcher Albertine Oldehinkel has perfected a 
tather ‘nasty’ social stress experiment called the Groningen 
Social Stress Test that shows how males and females react 
differently to stress.'* Once volunteers arrive in the lab, have 
their blood pressure monitored and a saliva sample tested for 
cortisol, Oldehinkel abruptly asks them to present an off-the- 
cuff six-minute public speech about their lives. She tells them 
it will be recorded to be evaluated and rated by their friends. 
Immediately after the speech she then asks the volunteer to 
stand in front of a group of people and subtract the number 
seventeen repeatedly, starting with 1327, and all the while she 
shouts instructions such as ‘Stop wiggling your hands’ or ‘You 
ate too slow, be as quick as you can, we are running out of 
time!’ As you'd expect, blood pressure and salivary cortisol 
levels shoot up immediately after the test! 
Oldehinkel’s work has shown teenage boys and men tend to 
display larger cortisol responses to social stress than teenage 
gitls and women. These sex differences emerge at puberty, 
disappear at menopause, and for women vary during the 
menstrual cycle and if they’re on the pill. “We propose that 


[PDF page 162]

150 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
particularly blunted cortisol responses to stress are associated 
with a high likelihood of depression after stressful life 
events occurrence, writes Oldehinkel. Multiple studies have 
demonstrated the counterintuitive result that high cortisol 
levels during stress are associated with lower risk of subsequent 
depression. 
Oldehinkel suggests that cortisol prepares the body to face 
stressful situations by, among other things, increasing glucose 
levels; for some reason this is up-regulated in men. ‘Women’s 
blunted cortisol reaction to stress may therefore result in 
decreased energy supply and fatigue, which in turn could induce 
other depressive symptoms, she says. ‘An alternative explanation 
could be that blunted stress responses signal dysfunctional 
coping strategies, which can lead to feelings of discomfort and 
lack of control following the stressful experience.’ 
Is depression due to inflammation? 
‘Inflammation’ is the health buzzword of the moment. There 
is growing evidence that inflammation — already implicated in 
heart disease, obesity, and metabolic disorders — is involved 
in brain diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease, multiple 
sclerosis and perhaps depression. 
The brain has its own resident immune system consisting 
of microglia that migrate into the brain during embryonic 
development. As well as resident microglia, an intimate /éte-d-féte 
exists between the brain and peripheral immune system. 
Some researchers hypothesise that not only physical 
threats like viruses or injury but also social challenges, stress 
and adversity trigger the production of ‘pro-inflammatory 
cytokines’ — messenger molecules that orchestrate the immune 
response to injury and infection. 


[PDF page 163]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 151 
Cytokine levels are altered in anxiety and depression. 
Evidence from both human and animal studies has found that 
injecting inflammatory cytokines causes depressive symptoms." 
One clinical trial found that depressed people who had not 
responded to antidepressants improved after being treated 
with an anti-inflammatory drug, but only if they already had 
increased inflammatory cytokine levels.'° 
From an evolutionary perspective, successful defence against 
pathogens involved not only the activation of our immune 
system but also behaviouts such as hypetvigilance against future 
attack or hiding away (in bed with a pillow over your head) if 
sick or wounded. It’s proposed ‘sickness’ behaviours which 
closely mimic depression wete beneficial for the survival of 
women, because we wete mostly involved in homely activities 
such as child care, whereas men were the adventurous hunters 
and providers of food and protection. 
So, is depression a side effect of inflammation? 
Maybe. While there may be a connection between 
inflammation and depression, we can’t say for sure that one leads 
directly to the other. Not everyone who suffers from depression 
has evidence of inflammation. Likewise, not all people with 
high levels of inflammation develop depression. As we’ve seen, 
depression depends on a complex interplay of a spectrum of 
tisks and resilience which ate present to varying degrees and in 
different combinations in everyone. 
‘One thing is for sure, writes Carmine Pariante, a researcher 
with an interest in stress, inflammation and depression. 
‘Deptession and mental health problems in general can no 
longer be seen only as disorders of the mind, or indeed only as 
disorders of the brain. The strong impact of the immune system 
on emotions and behaviour demonstrates that mental health 1s 
the health of the whole body.” 


[PDF page 164]

152 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Stress and gender issues 
Globally, girls and women are at greater risk from gender- 
based violence including rape, forced marriage, intimate 
partner violence, genital mutilation and childhood sexual 
abuse than males. Childhood sexual abuse estimates indicate a 
prevalence of about one in five girls and just under one in ten 
boys. These estimates are thought to be conservative and the 
WHO reports put the figure closer to seventy per cent in some 
countries. '** 
‘Part of the gender gap might be explained by heightened 
exposure to severe adversity, particularly childhood sexual abuse 
and other violence against women and girls, writes Kuehner in 
Lancet Psychiatry.'* | 
Kuehnet points out that gender inequality in terms of 
political participation, economic autonomy and reproductive 
rights affects the gender ratio in depression. For example, 
one study found women living in US states with lower gender 
equality reported more depressive symptoms than women living 
in states with higher gender equality.’ Similar findings have 
been reported in Europe.'”’ 
The global Women’s March of 2017 and mottos that 
have sprung rapidly into our collective consciousness 
(‘Nevertheless, she persisted’ being my personal favourite) 
highlight how far we have to go to achieve gender equality 
and recognition of girls’ and women’s rights. The social media 
#MeélToo campaign that swept the globe in late 2017, during 
which women who had been sexually harassed or assaulted 
wrote ‘Me too’ as a status update, suggests the WHO estimates 
are likely accurate. 


[PDF page 165]

DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 153 
You’re depressed or anxious — now what? 
At this point it’s worth considering whether neuroscience can 
shed any light on mental illness at all. There has always been 
criticism 1n psychology and psychiatry about the ‘seduction of 
reductionism’, and whether we can explain or cure mental illness 
by looking at its neural or genetic underpinnings. From my 
perspective, considering mental illness through a neuroscience 
lens isn’t an attempt to offer answers but just one of many lenses 
through which to view the problem. 
Not all treatments work for all people all of the time 
There are many different approaches to treat depression and 
anxiety. They can be loosely divided up into: 
Medical treatments 
@ Antidepressants and/or anti-anxiolytics. 
Q Electrical stimulation, e.g. electroconvulsive therapy, or 
transcranial magnetic stimulation. 
Psychological therapies 
Q Talking therapies, e.g. cognitive behavioural therapy. 
Q Mindfulness-based therapies. 
@ Relationship therapy. 
Lifestyle therapies 
2 Exercise, dietary changes, massage, sleep deprivation, 
mindfulness and meditation and so on. 
Any teputable doctor or therapist will tell you that just because 
a treatment is shown to work scientifically, that does not mean 


[PDF page 166]

154 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
it will work equally well for everyone. In other words: not all 
treatments work for all people all of the time. 
The world of wellbeing is full of claims and counterclaims, 
accusations and conflicting information about mind and brain 
health. I suggest that if someone claims they have she one- 
size-fits-all solution to your mental health problem, that you’re 
‘weak’ or ‘not a feminist’ or ‘opting out of your healing journey 
by trying antidepressants’ or any other such stigmatising or 
non-supportive comment, then run the other way. I also find 
the use of the word ‘truth’ to be a red flag. Find someone who'll 
help find the right solution for you. 
Beyondblue.clearly states, “While [a treatment] might work for 
the average person, some people will have complications, side- 
effects or incompatibilities with their lifestyle. The best strategy 
is to try an approach that works for most people and that you 
are comfortable with. If you do not recover quickly enough, or 
experience problems with the treatment, then try another.’ 
Another factor to consider is your belief system. Treatments 
ate more likely to work if you believe they will, which is why 
placebo effects are powerful. Curiously, the most powerful 
ingredient of the placebo effect is the therapeutic relationship. 
Once again human connection, love and affection are the 
ultimate buffers for stress and the solution to many of our ills. 


[PDF page 167]

Sex, Love and 
Neurobiology 
IF YOU MIX A GIN AND TONIC IN A ROOM LIT BY ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT, 
your drink will glow a brilliant blue. This is because tonic 
contains a chemical called quinine, originally used to treat 
malaria, and when exposed to the right wavelength of light the 
chemical fluoresces. After being told this fact by a university 
lecturer, my best friend and I spent much of the late 1990s 
promenading around clubs and parties with glasses of glowing 
blue gin in our hands. They acted as our conversation starters, 
out lures, our tools of woo. 
In January 1999, my G&T and I wete prowling round a 
house on Banbury Road in Oxford when we caught the eye of a 
young Irish economist with a smile as brilliant as my gin. “What 
are you drinking?’ he asked. “Let me tell you about ultraviolet 
spectrum of light? I replied. The attraction was instant. 
We went on to discuss interest rates (I never understood the 
difference between interest paid and earned, and he patiently 
explained) and synapses. During our gin-soaked conversation 
he learned ‘synapse’ is Latin for ‘clasp, join together, tie or bind, 
to be in connection with’. Prescient words, because we’ve been 
155 


[PDF page 168]

156 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
bound together ever since. Yes, I seduced my husband with the 
language of science — first with physics, then with neurobiology. 
Love has inspired great works of art and literature, and 
countless song lyrics, and forms the foundations of our families, 
so understand it seems almost sacrilegious to consider it through 
the lens of neuroscience. Yet love is profoundly biological and 
deeply affects our bodies and minds. In the absence of loving 
relationships, babies fail to flourish. Children raised in abusive 
homes carry psychological scars for life. Teenagers become 
suicidal in the face of bullying or unrequited love. New mothers 
lacking the so-called village of social support slip into postnatal 
depression. Marital status 1s correlated to health — on average 
you're better off health-wise married than single. Loneliness in 
the elderly has the same impact on dementia risk as smoking a 
pack of cigarettes a day. 
Considering sex through the lens of biology is perhaps a 
concept we’re more comfortable with. It’s common to hear it’s 
not our genitals but, rather, our brains that are our most sexual 
organs. Sex is perhaps the ultimate bottom-up outside-in top- 
down biological experience. 
In this chapter, we'll explore the neurobiology of attraction, 
desire, the sexual response cycle and orgasms. Then we'll close 
the bedroom door to focus on romantic love, attachment and 
how social connections buffer stress. 
Adolescence is a sensitive period 
for learning about sex 
As a teen, I had a clear image in mind of my ideal guy and 
spent many hours dreaming about where we’d meet (often in 
a library, which is kind of embarrassing to admit but that was 
my native habitat), what beaches we'd walk along hand in hand, 


[PDF page 169]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 157 
and the heart-to-heatt conversations we’d have. Helen Fisher, 
a biological anthropologist who works at the world-renowned 
Kinsey Institute for sex research calls this idealistic image a 
‘love map’. ‘Long before your true love walks up to you in a 
classroom, at a shopping mall, in the office, at a coffee shop, or 
at a patty or event, says Fisher, ‘you have constructed the basic 
elements of your ideal sweetheart.’ 
We start to piece together our love maps during adolescence 
around the same time our sexual feelings first develop. Teenage 
brains are very plastic, and adolescence is thus a sensitive period 
for learning how to navigate romantic and sexual relationships. 
Research has largely ignored this phase of development, and only 
recently have we realised that adolescence is when young women 
begin to explore their sexual identity, construct their love maps, 
and hopefully gain positive and affirming experiences that will 
inform both."! 
The alchemy of attraction 
What happens in our brains when we're sexually attracted 
to one person and not another? Why hime Why her? Why a 
smiling Irish economist in January 1999? Fate? Hormonesp 
Pheromones? Complementary love maps? Or, in my case, too 
much gin? 
One robust finding in the ‘mate choice’ literature is that we 
tend to pait up with people who are ‘like us’ — a phenomenon 
known as ‘positive assortative mating’. On average (not always), 
we're attracted to someone of a similar age, ethnicity and 
socioeconomic background, someone with the same level of 
intelligence and education, someone who shares our values and 
goals, and someone physically similar. Those couples in decades- 
long relationships didn’t morph over time to look alike; research 


[PDF page 170]

158 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
shows they actively sought out a look-alike mate from the start. 
‘We’re more like our partners than would be expected by chance,’ 
University of Queensland researcher Brendan Zietsch told me. 
Because I walked into an Oxford graduate party one night in 
January 1999, there was a high chance I’d find someone who'd 
match my ‘love map’. And it’s likely we ‘positively assorted’ 
ourselves too. When I first showed a photo of my new beau to 
my blue-gin partner in crime her immediate response was, “He’s 
definitely a you boy!’ 
As ptimitive as it seems, how we smell may also be part of 
the sexual chemistry equation. Pheromones ate chemical signals 
that have evolved for communication with other members of the 
same species, and the pheromones in our sweat provide a potent 
clue to the owner’s genes. In particular, genes code for a group 
of immune molecules called major histocompatibility complexes 
(MHCs). Here’s where evolution gets devious: it turns out we’re 
more attracted to the smell of MHCs that are most dissimilar 
to our own. Quite the opposite from what positive assortative 
look-alike theory would have you guess. 
The Swiss ‘sweaty T-shirt study’ published in 1995 found that 
the more different a man’s MHC genes are from a woman’s, the 
mote attractive he seems to her. In the study, male and female 
students from the University of Bern were first typed for their 
MHCs, then each man was given a T-shirt to wear for a couple 
of days and nights (they were encouraged not to shower or use 
deodorant). After they returned the sweaty T-shirts, the women 
were given six shirts to sniff and rate by preference. Ultimately, 
women preferred the sweaty smell of men whose MHC was 
most dissimilar to their own. They often remarked that they 
preferred shirts that reminded them of their boyfriends, both 
past and present, whereas unfavourable-smelling shirts tended 
to remind women of their fathers.'™ 


[PDF page 171]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 159 
Interestingly, women on the contraceptive pill showed a 
stronger preference for sweaty T-shirts worn by men who were 
most MHC-similar. We have a heightened sense of smell around 
ovulation, and it’s thought this is how evolution ensures that 
genetic diversity is maintained. MHC-dissimilar couples are 
more fertile and less likely to be related. Somehow the pill 
interferes with this mechanism.!* 
How hormones influence mate choice and sex drive 
The female sex drive waxes and wanes across the monthly cycle, 
peaking around ovulation. Evidence shows that fluctuation in 
ovarian hormones influences who we find attractive, who finds 
us attractive, and how frisky we feel. 
Here’s some research that always causes quite a stir. 
A 2012 paper entertainingly titled “Ovulation leads women to 
perceive sexy cads as good dads’ suggests that when we’re most 
fertile we’te more likely to be attracted to the high-testosterone 
masculine man of ‘superior genetic quality’ versus the bookish 
nice guy who'd make a ‘good husband and father’. (Note, the 
teseatch is about who we’te a/tracied to, not necessarily sleeping 
with.) In contrast, when we’re on the pill, or in the luteal or 
bleeding phases of our cycles, we quite happily settle for the 
nice guy.'** 
There is data both supporting and refuting this so-called 
‘ovulation shift cad or dad’ hypothesis. Rob Brooks, a professor 
of evolutionary ecology at the University of New South Wales 
has tracked the literature and points out that the shifts in 
preferences are actually pretty small. ‘It’s not as though you're 
going to be truly, madly, deeply in love with your husband the 
one day and furtively shagging the pool guy the next, he says. 
Brooks also notes that what’s more intriguing 1s we’re still happy 
to jump into the sack when the chances of concetving are nil.'® 


[PDF page 172]

160 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Feeling frisky on oestrogen 
If you remember, in chapter 6 I met with researcher Bronwyn 
Graham, who explained that around ovulation oestrogen 
lowers anxiety. Female animals in oestrus hop, preen, wriggle 
their eats, dance, sing, change colour or display lordosis — the 
‘come hither’ response female rodents adopt to enable males to 
mount — to attract a mate. Oestrogen leads to females feeling 
less risk averse and more willing to act in a way that encourages 
sexual interaction. Of course, we human women don’t exactly 
go into heat, strip off our knickers and run around shagging 
every willing male in the vicinity when we ovulate, but there 1s 
good evidence to suggest that oestrogen makes us feel frisky and 
behave in subtle ways that display this desire to a potential mate. 
In 2013 a paper published in the journal Hormones and Behavior 
described the relationship between three hormones (oestradiol, 
progesterone and testosterone) and women’s sexual desire.'” 
By now it shouldn’t surprise you that this was one of the first 
comptehensive studies to explore desire, hormones and the 
menstrual cycle. 
Each morning of the study, forty-three naturally cycling 
women (i.e. women not using hormonal contraceptives) collected 
a salivary sample that was used to assay their individual levels 
of oestradiol, progesterone and testosterone. Then the women 
were prompted by an app to respond to the following questions: 
‘Did you engage in sexual activity (intercourse or other forms 
of genital stimulation) with another person yesterday?’ ‘Who 
initiated the sexual activity? (You, Other person, Bothy ‘Did 
you engage in self-stimulation (masturbation) yesterday?” 
The wording of questions was important. Historically, good 
old-fashioned penis-in-vagina intercourse was taken as the 
ptincipal indicator of women’s desire. We now understand that 


[PDF page 173]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 161 
a far more accurate measure of desire is to ask women whether 
or not they fe/t like having sex, if they masturbated or if they 
initiated sex with a partner. 
When the data were crunched, the following relationships 
between hormones and desire were found: 
2 Oe6estradiol increased desire. 
Q Progesterone decreased desire. 
Q Testosterone had no impact on desire whatsoever. 
Australian women’s’ health researcher Professor Lorraine 
Dennerstein has also found a link between oestrogen and 
desire. Kor eight years she tracked a cohort of 226 women as 
they transitioned from early to late menopause. As we'll learn in 
chapter 9, levels of ovarian hormones decline during menopause. 
Each woman’s hormone levels and sexual desire were charted and 
Dennerstein found that oestrogen was indeed correlated with 
libido. Dennerstein has also found that young women who've had 
their ovaries surgically removed (for various reasons but often as 
part of cancer treatment), resulting in a sudden loss of oestrogen, 
also report lost libido.’ 
Further evidence for the role of oestrogen in promoting desire 
comes from reports that some women on the pill lose their sex 
drive — about fifteen per cent, according to a 2013 review.’* This is 
potentially problematic for women who start taking the pill in their 
eatly teens. They may never have experienced strong sexual desire 
ot arousal and, to put it bluntly, may not know what they’re missing, 
Let’s talk about sexual response cycles 
Of course, there’s far more to our complex and nuanced sex 
lives than hormones and fertility. Sometimes we're wildly 


[PDF page 174]

162 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
turned on by a mere thought. Other times even the most skilled 
attention by a romantic partner leaves us cold. Sometimes 
we’te horny as anything when the chance of pregnancy 1s 
nil. Sometimes we desire sex during our periods, when we're 
pregnant, after menopause and with other women. We have sex 
for all sorts of reasons and getting pregnant isn’t usually the end 
goal. One survey of 3000 men and women identified no less 
than 237 different reasons for wanting to have sex!'” 
To understand how our minds, bodies and brains process 
hundreds of reasons why, it’s worth understanding the so-called 
sexual response cycle. The basic phases of the sexual response 
cycle were first described back in the 1960s by pioneering sex 
researchers William Masters and Virginia Johnson. Their four- 
step model based on ‘10 000 complete cycles of sexual response’ 
was linear and assumed men and women progressed sequentially 
through each phase: arousal, plateau, orgasm and finally to 
resolution or satisfaction. 
As you'd expect, the basic model has been challenged and 
refined over the years. 
The first challenge was made by sex educator Beverly 
Whipple, who pointed out that some women move from arousal 
to orgasm without ever experiencing desire, or may experience 
arousal and satisfaction without climaxing.'®’'' Another 
researcher, Rosemary Basson, proposed an alternative circular 
model which incorporates such things as a woman’s need for 
intimacy, the fact that desite can be responsive or spontaneous, 
and desire may come either before or after physical arousal. 
Crucially, Basson’s model considers the importance of the 
larger context of women’s lives, in particular the relationship 
between the women and her partner.'*' ' Another discovery 
calling the linear model into question was the finding that many 
women show a disconnect between their subjective arousal state 


[PDF page 175]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 163 
(‘I’m feeling turned on’) and physiological measures of arousal 
(measures of vaginal lubrication or congestion). Men’s responses 
are rarely disconnected. Erections and arousal are tightly linked 
and boys figure this out pretty early on in puberty. 
And, of course, let’s not ignore the contributions made by 
lab rodents who've helped us understand the neurobiology. In 
rodents, the phases of sexual pleasure — excitement, plateau, 
ofgasm and refraction — adhere very well to other ‘pleasure 
cycles’ such as hunger or thirst. Basically, rodents have shown us 
we want something (motivation), like something (pleasure), have 
our fill (satiety) and either stick around for more or move on. | 
acknowledge that neuroscience removes a little of the romantic 
frisson. 
Turning on the ‘ONs’ and 
turning off the ‘OFFs’ 
My favourite researcher in female sexuality, Emily Nagoski, a 
sex educator and author of Come As You Are and the delightful 
TEDx talk ‘Unlocking the Door to Your Authentic Sexual 
Wellbeing’, does an impressive job weaving numerous threads 
into a coherent story. 
Nagoski explains that our desire results from a balance 
between ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ mechanisms in the brain. According 
to the dual-control model, an ‘accelerator’ notices all the sexually 
relevant information that might turn you on, whereas the 
‘brakes’ notice all the reasons not to turn on. Thus, the process 
of becoming aroused involves both ‘turning on the “ONs”’ 
and ‘turning off the “OFFs’. ‘Your level of sexual arousal at 
any given moment is the product of how much stimulation the 
accelerator is getting and how little stimulation the brakes are 
getting, explains Nagoski."® 


[PDF page 176]

164 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
According to Nagoski, if you’re struggling to get aroused, you 
might be suffering from lack of accelerator, a highly sensitive 
brake, or a bit of both. It turns out some difficulties with arousal 
can be solved by pushing harder on the accelerator; however, 
sensitive brakes are the stronger predictor of sexual problems. 
Nagoski suggests that 1f you’re a woman who has trouble having 
an orgasm or takes an hour to get there, you may take a lot of 
‘ON’ activity to generate a really high level of sexual tension, 
and a tiny touch of anxiety or stress to hit your brakes. Because 
orgasms happen when you generate a sufficient level of sexual 
tension in your body to cross a threshold, she suggests using a 
vibrator to learn how to climax. Essentially the vibrator floors 
the accelerator and overrides the brakes. 
Cleverly, the dual-control model conceptualises sexual 
excitation and inhibition as separate systems. This is in contrast 
to the more traditional way of thinking about arousal as a 
linear process. The beauty of the dual-control model is that it 
recognises we're all different. What turns each of us on and off 
differs widely. 
Where are the brain’s ON and OFF switches? 
The dual-control system is theoretical. As yet, there are no 
precisely identified ON or OFF switches in the brain. Just 
think of all the sensations, thoughts and feelings that can turn 
you on ot off: feeling loved, novelty, potential pregnancy, how 
you feel about your body, how you feel about how your partner 
feels about your body, your trauma history, tiredness, the grocery 
list. Clearly, integrating this information requires multiple brain 
networks. 
Sexual excitation probably involves brain networks utilising 
the neurochemicals dopamine, oxytocin, vasopressin and 
noradrenaline. We know dopamine telease leads to feelings 


[PDF page 177]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 165 
of intense pleasure (liking) and the motivation to seek out 
the pleasurable experience again (wanting). Interestingly, a 
well-documented side effect of Parkinson’s disease treatment, 
whereby dopamine levels are increased with drugs, is enhanced 
libido. And looping back to the role of hormones, oestrogen 
facilitates dopamine release, perhaps accounting for the 
experience of ‘wanting’ or desire around ovulation.’ 
Sexual inhibition likely involves the same brain networks as 
arousal; however, activity may be dampened by serotonin and the 
endocannabinoid systems. These brain chemicals ate involved 
in sexual satiety and the refractory period after orgasm.’ '° 
One of the strongest lines of evidence implicating serotonin 
in sexual braking is the effect antidepressants, especially 
SSRIs, have on sexual responses. One side effect of SSRIs is 
the inability to achieve orgasm. In fact, the strong braking 
effect of SSRIs has resulted in their off-label use to treat 
premature ejaculation. Serotonin is generally inhibitory to 
sexual responses in rats too. Male rats allowed to mate until 
they’re sexually exhausted can be encouraged to respond to the 
solicitations of females if they’re injected with drugs that block 
serotonin. Female rats given SSRIs tend to steer clear of male 
rats, and reduce the amount of time they display lordosis when 
they’re fertile. 
Can drugs be used to hit the sexual 
accelerator or brake? 
If drugs that increase serotonin dampen desire, and drugs that 
increase dopamine can potentially fire up arousal, why not 
simply pop a pill to ‘turn on the ONs’ and ‘turn off the OFF’? 
Drugs that selectively activate the accelerator or release the 
brakes ate in use to treat hypoactive sexual desire disorder 
(HSDD), a type of sexual dysfunction affecting approximately 


[PDF page 178]

166 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
ten per cent of adult women. HSDD is characterised by loss of 
desire and, importantly, is accompanied by frustration, grief, 
sadness, ot worry concerning the lost libido." One such drug 
used to treat HSDD is flibanserin (sold under the brand name 
Addyi and sometimes known as ‘pink viagra’). Flibanserin is 
currently approved to treat HSDD by the United States Food 
and Drug Administration (US FDA), but is not yet available in 
many countries, including Australia. 
Flibanserin works by increasing dopamine and decreasing 
serotonin. In other words, it’s perfectly designed to 
simultaneously hit the accelerator and release the brakes. 
When Addyi was first launched it was welcomed as a win by 
women’s sexual health campaigners who for years had bemoaned 
the fact that men had Viagra and women had nothing. Other 
groups, however, have questioned whether libido can actually 
be fixed by a pill.'°’ Looking at the data, it is easy to see where 
the scepticism comes from. Compared to a placebo, women 
taking Addyi reported only one more ‘sexually satisfying event’ 
per month accompanied by very little increase in actual desire. 
Or, put another way, women taking Addyi have more frequent 
sex, but they don’t ‘want’ it more often. Addy1 also comes with 
significant side effects including low blood pressure, fainting, 
nausea and dizziness, all of which are heightened when women 
drink alcohol. 
Testosterone — does it really boost libido in women? 
In Australia, where flibanserin is not available, post-menopausal 
women ate often prescribed testosterone to treat low desire. It 
has been known since the early 1940s that very high doses of 
testosterone increase arousal in women. 
Professor Susan Davis, an endocrinologist and women’s 
health specialist at Monash University, has prescribed 


[PDF page 179]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 167 
testosterone for loss of interest in sex in women. She has found 
about sixty per cent of women suffering low libido respond well, 
twenty per cent don’t respond at all, and for twenty per cent it 
makes things worse.'® 
Bear in mind that when it comes to sex, responding ‘well’ is 
a matter of opinion, and naturally menopausal women taking 
testosterone report an extra one to two ‘sexually satisfying 
experiences’ per month. Women who've experienced surgical 
menopause feport in the order of two to three extra sexually 
satisfying experiences per month when taking high doses of 
testosterone compated to a placebo.” 
Testosterone might be intimately entwined with arousal and 
desire in men, but its use in women remains controversial. First, 
no trial of testosterone has run for more than three years, so the 
long-term effects and risks of testosterone on women’s health are 
unknown. Second, there is little evidence that testosterone itself 
predicts desire across the monthly cycle or after menopause. 
Third, testosterone doesn’t appear to help low sex drive in pre- 
menopausal women. 
How testosterone works to increase desire when it does ‘work’ 
remains yet another great unknown in the world of female brain 
research. Testosterone is converted to oestrogen in the brain, 
so it might work by increasing oestrogen levels towards those 
naturally occurring around ovulation. 
The women’s health organisation Jean Hailes for Women’s 
Health states that the relationship between testosterone and 
libido is very complex and age, mood, general wellbeing, and 
the potential risks of testosterone therapy must be taken into 
account when making the choice whether to use it. Stress, 
relationships and emotions have far more influence on women’s 
sexual desire, and as Susan Davis points out, if your relationship 
has gone sour, ‘it can’t be fixed with hormones’. 


[PDF page 180]

168 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
The current best treatment for HSDD or low libido is the 
bio-psychosocial approach, that is, taking into account bottom- 
up, outside-in and top-down factors. Sex therapy teaches 
women how their sexuality is influenced by negative thoughts, 
beliefs, expectations, cultural and religious standards, moods 
and relationships (not just hormones!), and how desire can 
be spontaneous and come from within (top-down from our 
thoughts) or from the outside world (from the touch of an 
attentive lover). By learning and practising a variety of exercises 
that attempt to improve awareness of the here and now, 
acceptance and self-compassion, women often become ‘more 
comfortable being in their own skin’, sex therapist and sexologist 
Isiah McKimmie told me. ‘Let’s not forget, what’s happening 
outside the bedroom influences what is happening inside the 
bedroom, she said. 
Mating in captivity — are you just bored? 
McKimmie explained that the early honeymoon phase of a 
relationship is known as ‘limerence’ — that fantastical stage when 
you can’t keep your hands off each other. Limerence typically 
fades after a few years when the reality of everyday life kicks in. 
‘It doesn’t mean you're no longer in love, or don’t care, it means 
you're entering a new phase,’ she said. The trouble is, the ‘death 
of eros’ is often accompanied by loss of libido. 
Here’s an interesting twist to the story: loss of libido isn’t so 
much about biology as it is about boredom, especially for midlife 
women in long-term relationships. 
Dennerstein found that women who took a new lover after 
the menopause reported their libido to be unchanged by their 
‘ageing hormonal status’. Her 2002 Australian study tracked 
hundreds of women from their forties through menopause, and 
found dampened sexual enthusiasm was mote closely related to 


[PDF page 181]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 169 
long-term stale relationships than ageing ovaries. For women 
in new relationships limerence triumphed over hormonal 
factors.” '° This result flies in the face of popular wisdom 
(and conventional couples therapy) that assumes women require 
security, familiarity and monogamy to feel sexual desire. 
Daniel Bergner, author of What Do Women Want? Adventures 
in the Scaence of Eemale Desire, and Esther Perel, author of the 
delightfully titled Mating in Captivity: Sex, Lies and Domestic Bliss, 
both make compelling cases that the cause of lack of desire in 
women is boredom."" !” 
In her experience’ as a sex therapist, Perel believes that 
increased emotional intimacy is often accompanied by decreased 
desire. “What makes for good intimacy does not always make 
fot good sex,’ she says. For some couples, good communication, 
mutual respect, and honesty are tightly correlated to an ‘ongoing, 
pulsing erotic bond’. But for others the breakdown of desite is a 
consequence of the creation of intimacy. In her therapy practice, 
Perel counsels couples that the fundamental aspects of desire 
and yearning can be recreated within long-term telationships 
by injecting mystery, distance, and planning erotic ‘other- 
than-vanilla’ sex escapades. Daniel Bergner and his long-term 
eitlfriend’s solution to recapturing desire 1s more pragmatic: 
they now live six blocks apart. 
Sexual orientation and the brain 
Recently a colleague, University of Otago psychologist and 
author Jesse Bering, explained that gender is between the ears, 
sex is in the chromosomes and orientation is what turns you 
on — and that none of these are choices. 
Bering’s statement is backed up by extensive research on 
the biological factors influencing sexual orientation. As briefly 


[PDF page 182]

170 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
outlined in the introduction to this book, all people have a 
sexual orientation that’s separate from their biological sex and 
gender identity. 
What does neuroscience have to say on the topic of sexual 
orientation? As yet, science can’t fully explain how the brain 
generates various gender-related behaviours, sexual orientation 
or gender identity. “he relative contributions of genetic 
determinants and social experience remain to be determined, 
from Principles of Neural Science is a pretty typical statement in the 
literature. 
However, it is widely acknowledged that sexual orientation is 
multi-dimensional and that for some people, especially women, 
it’s dynamic and changes through the lifespan. The Dunedin 
Study found that same-sex attraction is more common among 
women than men at all ages.’ 
It’s worth noting that the Dunedin cohort were born in the 
mid-1970s, and if we look to younger generations, many are 
rejecting typical gender and sexual norms, and recognising that 
sexual orientation and gender are fluid.'* For example, The 
Massive Millennial Poll, a survey of 1000 people aged eighteen 
to thirty-four, found that over half believe gender is a spectrum 
and shouldn't be limited to the categories of male and female.'” 
Irrespective of your sexual orientation, being deeply in love 
with a man or a woman activates the same circuits in the brain. 
When Semir Zeki scanned the brains of twenty-four people, 
half of whom were female (six gay and six straight) and half 
male (six gay and six straight), while they viewed images of 
their sweethearts, the pattern of activation was the same in 
everyone. As Zeki points out, we didn’t need neuroscience to 
tell us this. The world literature of love does not differentiate 
between gay, straight and otherwise. ‘Indeed, the sentiments 
expressed are so similar as to introduce a profound ambiguity 


[PDF page 183]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 171 
that makes it easy to read these texts in the opposite- or same- 
sex contexts, regardless of the authors’ intentions, writes Zeki. 
“This is true of the sonnets of Shakespeare, among others, and 
is much aided where the language used is silent as to gender, as 
in the poetry of Rumi and Hafiz in Farsi.’!”° Love conquers all. 
#loveislove. 
The neurobiology of orgasms 
If you’ve figured out how to ‘turn on the ONs’ and ‘turn off the 
OFF’’, you've attracted’a mate and decided to have sex, or you’te 
taking matters into your own hands, what happens in your brain 
and nervous system as you become aroused and reach orgasm? 
First, let’s define ‘orgasm’. 
One current working definition states: ‘An orgasm in the 
human female is a variable, transient peak sensation of intense 
pleasure, creating an altered state of consciousness, usually with 
an initiation accompanied by involuntary, rhythmic contractions 
of the pelvic striated circumvaginal musculature, often with 
concomitant uterine and anal contractions, and myotonia that 
resolves the sexually induced vasocongestion and myotonia, 
generally with an induction of well-being and contentment.’ 
(Note, myotonia = muscle relaxation, vasocongestion = swelling 
of genitals with blood.)'”’ 
Emily Nagoski uses a simpler definition: “Orgasm is a sudden, 
involuntary release of sexual tension.’ 
What are the neural pathways involved in the ‘involuntary, 
rhythmic contractions’ and ‘release of sexual tension’? 
Let’s start with the clitoris, for it has no purpose other than 
generating female orgasms (the stats back this up, with the 
Kinsey Institute reporting eighty to ninety per cent of women 
who masturbate reach orgasm via clitoris stimulation alone). 


[PDF page 184]

172 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Not unlike an iceberg, ninety per cent of the clitoris lies hidden 
beneath the surface of the vulva. Given the lack of attention 
paid to female health, it is hardly surprising a comprehensive 
account of clitoral anatomy was not provided until 2005, when 
Australian urologist Helen O’Connell published her Journa/ of 
Urology paper ‘Anatomy of the Clitoris’. Using MRI, anatomical 
dissections and an extensive review of the current and historical 
literature, O’Connell gave us our first detailed description of 
clitoral anatomy, blood and nervous supply. In her paper, she 
pointed out that as recently as 1999 anatomy textbooks omitted 
a description of the clitoris. By comparison it would be hard to 
find an anatomy text from any period of history that omitted 
the penis.'”* 
Now we understand that the clitoris 1s a multi-part system 
made up of the clitoral shaft, the crura or internal ‘legs’ of the 
clitoris, the corpus carvernosum, the urethral sponge and 
the vestibular bulbs on the inside. If you’re having trouble 
visualising it, it’s shaped rather like a wishbone with legs 
wrapping down around the urethra and vagina (or, as I’ve heard 
described, ‘a neck travel pillow’). 
The pudendal nerve, derived from the Latin word pudenda 
(meaning ‘the shameful parts’), innervates the clitoris, and 
the skin and muscles of the anus, perineum and pelvis. The 
pudendal nerve is actually a pair of nerves, one for each side of 
the pelvis, that has a complex anatomy with intricate branching 
patterns. It’s not uncommon for the nerve to become injured 
during a difficult birth, sometimes leaving untreated women 
incontinent, with perineal pain and sexual dysfunction. 
Neurons from the pudendal nerve arise from a structure in the 
spinal cord called Onuf’s nucleus, one of the few truly sexually 
dimorphic structures in the netvous system — it’s much larger in 
males than females because it contains more cells. At the same 


[PDF page 185]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 173 
time, it’s widely reported that there are twice as many nerve 
endings in the clitoris compared to the head of the penis (8000 
versus 4000) — ’ve been unable to find any academic literature 
to support or refute this claim. 
The shameful nerve should stand proud, as it’s the only nerve 
in the human body containing three neural sub-types: sensory 
neurons, motor neurons and autonomic neurons. ‘Touch your 
clitoris and you'll trigger signals that will travel along sensory 
neurons into the spinal cord and up to your brain. Practise 
squeezing your pelvic floor muscles (also called ‘Kegel exercises’) 
and the muscle contractions will be initiated by signals travelling 
down the motor neurons of the pudendal nerve. Experience the 
involuntary rhythmic contractions of orgasm — they come about 
via signals transmitted along the sympathetic neurons of the 
pudendal nerve. 
Of course, reaching orgasm is more complicated than 
triggering spinal reflexes. When the clitoris is fondled in just 
the right way, sensory neurons relay the signal to the spinal cord 
(the circuit sends another signal back to the genitals to increase 
blood flow and lubrication) and signals are relayed up to sexual 
centres in the brain, including those in the hypothalamus, 
hippocampus, amygdala, thalamus and cerebellum. There 
signals are modified as they integrate with visual cues, sounds, 
smells, thoughts and memories — ultimately, the ONs get turned 
on and the OFF off, leading to the sensation of orgasm. 
This is her brain during orgasm 
Researchers have been observing and documenting our 
physiological sexual responses — blood pressure, heart rate, 
vaginal lubrication and so on — since the days of Alfred Kinsey, 
Masters and Johnson. But only in recent years, with the advent 
of modern brain-scanning technology, have we been able to 


[PDF page 186]

174 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
observe what is happening in the brain in real time when we 
climax. 
Kayt Sukel, author of the book This zs Your Brain on Sex, 1s 
possibly better known as the woman who masturbated in an 
fMRI scanner so the world could watch her brain orgasm. Sukel 
did the deed in the Rutgers University research lab of Barry 
Komisaruk, watched over by then postdoctoral research fellow 
Nan Wise. In her book Sukel gives an entertaining account of the 
process, including descriptions of practising at home with a bell 
taped to her forehead as she learned to pleasure herself without 
moving (remaining completely still is essential for fMRI). 
No less than thirty discrete brain areas were activated before, 
during and after Sukel’s orgasm. A description of the patterns of 
brain activity in the Guardian newspaper mentions how activity 
first builds in the genital area of the sensory cortex then spreads 
to the limbic system (involved in emotion and memory). 
The orgasm arrives, activity shoots up in two parts of the brain 
called the cerebellum and the frontal cortex, perhaps because of 
greater muscle tension. During orgasm, activity reaches a peak 
in the hypothalamus, which releases a chemical called oxytocin 
that causes pleasurable sensations and stimulates the uterus to 
contract. Activity also peaks in the nucleus accumbens, an area 
linked to reward and pleasure. After orgasm, the activity in all 
these regions gradually calms down.'” 
Upon viewing Sukel’s fMRI, Nan Wise observed, ‘An orgasm 
teally is a whole-brain kind of experience.” Wise, who also 
‘donates’ her orgasms in the name of neuroscience, and says she 
hopes her research will eventually address gaps in the scientific 
literature regarding the neural basis of human sexuality. Right 
there is another PhD project waiting patiently for attention. 


[PDF page 187]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 175 
The neurobiology of multiple orgasms 
Time and time again while writing this book I’ve set out 
to research a particular topic expecting to find plenty of 
neuroscience literature, only to discover another gaping hole 
in our knowledge. While multiple orgasms are well described in 
the sexual health literature, like the clitoris they’re mysteriously 
missing from biology texts. 
One PubMed search I ran found only five reviews on multiple 
orgasms, three of which are about men, not women. One paper 
titled ‘Multiple Orgasms in Men—What We Know So Far’ 
concluded, “Despite popular interest, the topic of male multiple 
orgasms has received surprisingly little scientific assessment.’ 
Substitute ‘female’ in place of ‘male’ and the sentence retains 
accuracy. I asked researcher Brendan Zietsch (who has written 
academic articles about the female orgasm) if there was some 
literature I’d simply missed. He confirmed my findings — or lack 
thereof. Most of the literature focuses on women who never 
reach orgasm (anorgasmia) or who find it very difficult to climax 
(about one in ten women never have orgasms, and about one 
third struggle to climax regularly).'*” 
The best the academic literature can provide is to state that 
men don’t have multiple orgasms because they experience a 
‘latent state of arousal’ or ‘refractory period’ after ejaculation. 
The male refractory period can last for minutes (in teenage 
boys) to days (in older men), but the reasons why are obscure. 
From a brain perspective, after ejaculation prolactin levels rise 
and dopamine and testosterone levels plummet, dampening 
sexual desire and arousal. One suggestion is that it gives time 
for spetm to be produced again, and prevents the displacement 
of previously ejaculated sperm. It might also protect men from 
overstimulating their penis, resulting in irritation, and help 


[PDF page 188]

176 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
men avoid physical exhaustion. Presumably, the same refractory 
period doesn’t exist in women. Aren’t we lucky! 
A Finnish survey gives an insight into the characteristics of 
multi-orgasmic women.'*” 
2 About one in ten women had two or more orgasms 1n their 
latest intercourse. 
Q Women who regularly experience multiple orgasms 
considered orgasm in intercourse as ‘very important’. 
Q Multi-orgasmic women displayed strong sexual interests, 
and were sexually very active often, regularly used sex toys, 
and engaged in daily sexual intercourse. 
Q Multi-orgasmic women achieved frequent orgasms just as 
easily via masturbation as love-making. 
The authors couldn’t conclude whether experiencing joy during 
sex resulted in these women being multi-orgasmic, or if it is a 
case of the very positive sexual experiences encouraging sexual 
appetites. 
Are female orgasms just a happy accident? 
Unlike the male orgasm, which 1s the reward that comes from 
depositing one’s sperm, female orgasms are unnecessary for 
conception. So why do we experience them at all? 
Numerous ideas persist among those who ponder such issues 
(upwards of twenty-one theories, according to Elisabeth Lloyd, 
who wrote an entite book, The Case of the Female Orgasm: Bias in the 
Sczence of Evolution, examining each idea). Some theories consider 
the female orgasm to be an evolutionary adaptation necessary 
for promoting pair bonding. When we orgasm, concentrations 
of arousing neurotransmitters flood our body and_ brain, 
promoting feelings of connection and emotional closeness. If 


[PDF page 189]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY Nae 
your partner makes you feel good then you’te mote likely to stay 
together to raise any offspring.'*! 
Another school of thought proposes that during orgasm the 
cetvix rhythmically dips up and down into the pool of semen 
(presumably already left behind) and sucks sperm into the 
uterus, thereby increasing the probability of conception. The 
‘in-suck theory’ (their words, not mine) has been extensively 
studied using a variety of technologies, including tiny penis- 
mounted cameras in humans. But results are conflicting. 
One recent study found there was a significant difference in 
semen retention when women orgasmed, but it wasn’t linked to 
improved fertility.’ 
The current favoured philosophy is the ‘happy accident’ that 
suggests orgasms are a by-product (or fantastic bonus, depending 
on how you see it) of early embryonic development whereby the 
male and female genitalia arise from the same tissue. Some liken 
the clitoris to a tiny vestigial penis that just happens to provide 
orgasms to females only because they’re necessary for males to 
achieve reproductive success. In other words, we have orgasms 
by default (or perhaps destiny)."*” 
Can we become addicted to love? 
Love reseatchers suggest that the symptoms of falling in 
love and into addiction are very similar. New lovers, like all 
addicts, yearn for their new love (craving); they feel a rush 
of exhilaration when seeing or thinking about him or her 
(euphoria/intoxication) and seek to interact with their beloved 
mote and morte frequently over time (tolerance). Then, like 
addicts, if the relationship souts, the common signs of 
withdrawal set in: crying, lethargy, anxiety, insomnia and so on. 
‘Like most addicts, rejected lovers also often go to extremes, 


[PDF page 190]

178 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
even sometimes doing degrading or physically dangerous things 
to win back the beloved, says Fisher.'** '* 
Addictive substances hijack the dopamine pathways involved 
in motivation. Often called the ‘pleasure’ molecule, dopamine 
encourages ‘wanting’ more than ‘liking’. Regardless of the 
stimulus, Fisher suspects our brains become habituated to 
elevated levels of dopamine, which 1s why the ecstasy of early 
romantic love doesn’t last forever. If the ‘liking’ isn’t there 
once the ‘wanting’ fades, people set off in search of the next 
rush. In her studies of people who remain happily in love and 
together after decades, a second neural network is recruited as 
true ‘liking’ sets in. This network is associated with attachment, 
empathy and emotional regulation. It turns out the deeply 
committed couples who remain in love not only continue to 
‘want’ their partner, they quite like them too.'® 
Oxytocin — one molecule to 
love and bond us all? 
To say we're social animals is a cliché, but from the moment 
we're born we’re bound to others. ‘Love is deeply biological, 
write husband-and-wife team Sue Carter and Stephen Porges in 
EMBO Reports. ‘It pervades evety aspect of our lives and has 
inspired countless works of art. Love also has a profound effect 
on our mental and physical state.’'*° 
When biologists dissect the biochemistry of love, they return 
time and time again to one molecule: oxytocin. 
It wasn’t that long ago that our interest in oxytocin was confined 
to its perfunctory roles in labour and lactation. Oxytocin is a 
neuropeptide (a small protein used by neurons to communicate) 
and it was originally extracted from puréed pituitary gland. In the 
eatly 1900s, British pharmacologist Henry Dale found he could 


[PDF page 191]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 179 
hasten the labour of pregnant cats by injecting them with the 
pituitary extract. Within a couple of years, Dale’s ‘hormone of 
swift birth’ was being administered to women in labour. Synthetic 
oxytocin is still used in labour wards today. 
Oxytocin is teleased during labour and also causes the 
smooth muscle contractions responsible for milk let-down 
during breastfeeding. Oxytocin and the hormone prostaglandin 
ate responsible for uterine contractions during the third stage 
of labour when the placenta is expelled. This is one reason 
why newborns ate encouraged to breastfeed immediately after 
birth — oxytocin released by suckling encourages contractions 
to shrink the womb and reduce post-partum haemorrhage. 
And, handily, oxytocin compels mothers to nurture their babies 
and keep them close. 
The effect of oxytocin on the mother—baby bond is seen to 
full effect in rodents. Normally a mother rat is very protective 
over her young and displays stereotypical maternal behaviours: 
she keeps her pups clustered together in a group, crouches 
over them, licks them, builds a nest, and if one pup becomes 
separated she’ll scurry over and drag the pup back to the litter. 
Neuroendocrinologists have discovered that infusing oxytocin 
into the brains of virgin rats causes them to behave as if they are 
the loving birth mothers to foster pups.'*’ 
If oxytocin was responsible for the kisses and cuddles I 
smothered my boys with after the agony and exhaustion of 
giving birth, it gets plenty of respect from me. 
Oxytocin — what we’ve learned from 
the monogamous prairie vole 
Oxytocin isn’t only the purveyor of the bond between mother 
and child, it also promotes male and female bonding after 
mating (and, presumably, more so after orgasm). 


[PDF page 192]

180 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
We’ve learned much of what we know about oxytocin and 
pait-bonding from prairie voles. They’re the darlings of oxytocin 
reseatch, because unlike most rodents — which have a deserved 
reputation for promiscuity — prairie voles are monogamous and 
mate for life. Sue Carter, the grand dame of oxytocin researchers, 
has spent her career studying prairie voles and has found that 
oxytocin together with its sister neuropeptide, vasopressin, 
underly vole devotion. 
Oxytocin and vasopressin are synthesised by neurons 
in the hypothalamus. The two neuropeptides are then 
transported along axons directly to the pituitary gland, where 
they’re packaged into vesicles and stored for release into the 
bloodstream as hormones. Oxytocin and vasopressin also act 
as neurotransmitters. Oxytocin- and vasopressin-containing 
neurons project from the hypothalamus to brain regions involved 
in social and emotional processing, such as the amygdala, 
hippocampus and nucleus accumbens. 
Oxytocin and vasopressin are released during mating. They 
reduce fear and anxiety by decreasing amygdala activity — a key 
region in the brain’s fear network — and they support lordosis. 
Oxytocin, especially, lowers the natural resistance most animals 
have to the proximity of others, facilitating what are known as 
‘approach behaviours’. It goes without saying that you need to get 
in quite close proximity to another of your species to procteate. 
Compared to their promiscuous cousins, prairie voles have 
higher levels of oxytocin and mote receptors for the neuropeptide 
in their brains. If oxytocin release is blocked, prairie voles act 
like typical rodents — they have fleeting episodes of mating and 
don’t settle down with one partner for life. Some very clever 
scientists have genetically manipulated the brains of mice to 
express prairie-vole-like patterns of oxytocin, which causes mice 
to behave much mote like their monogamous cousins. 


[PDF page 193]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 181 
Oxytocin, working in concert with a host of neurochemicals, 
has been implicated in an extraordinary number of social 
behaviours and physiological roles. A non-comprehensive taster 
list of oxytocin actions includes: 
Q Suppresses stress hormones cortisol and noradrenaline, and 
slows heart rate. 
Facilitates paternal care. 
Q Modulates distress in pups separated from their mother. 
Q Decreases anxiety and depression via oestrogen signalling. 
Q Is important for foetal heart development, and in adults 
protects against heart disease. 
Q Accelerates adult neurogenesis (in rodents).'*% !8% 18° 
Looking at this list, 1t’s easy to see why we get excited by the 
human potential contained in one tiny molecule (or two, if 
you include vasopressin). However, like all signalling pathways 
connecting body and brain, oxytocin and vasopressin can only 
exett their effect by ‘locking in’ to their receptors. And like all 
receptors, oxytocin and vasopressin receptors are regulated by 
genes, hormones, epigenetic factors and life experiences. It’s 
never quite as simple as we would like. 
Social support buffers stress because of oxytocin 
In her TED talk, ‘How to make stress your friend’, psychologist 
Kelly McGonigal proposes that oxytocin nudges you to share 
your feelings when you're stressed. ‘When life 1s difficult, your 
stress response wants you to be surrounded by people who care 
about you,’ she says.'”° 
We’ve explored the concept of social buffering throughout 
this book — it occurs not only for the mother—infant relationship 
but also in adult relationships, and time and again we’ve seen 


[PDF page 194]

182 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
how social support and love vaccinate against stress. Oxytocin 
may be the missing link. 
It turns out that oxytocin is released not only in response 
to positive social interactions but to very stressful experiences 
too (well, at least this is the case in rodents — we don’t yet know 
if this occurs in humans). Oxytocin modulates the HPA axis 
and immune system. In both animals and humans, injecting 
oxytocin lowers blood levels of cortisol. “Che protective effects 
of positive sociality seem to rely on the same cocktail of 
hormones that carry a biological message of “love” throughout 
the body, writes Sue Carter. “The same molecules that allow 
us to give and. receive love, also link our need for others with 
health and well-being.’'* 
At the same time as having a physiological effect on our 
sttess response, oxytocin works to counter stress by ‘nudging’ 
people to seek support, in turn upping oxytocin levels further. 
It’s been suggested that the very strong emotional bonds that 
form between folk during periods of extreme duress, especially 
when the survival depends on the presence and support of 
others, are due to oxytocin. 
As McGonigal says, “When you choose to connect with 
others under stress you can create resilience.’ 
ls oxytocin the new love potion? 
Untangling oxytocin’s role in humans ts clearly going to be more 
challenging than in prairie voles. Oxytocin is not the molecular 
equivalent of love — it’s just one important component of a 
neurochemical system that allows us to respond emotionally to 
others. 
Despite the cautiousness of biologists, oxytocin has earned 
a global reputation as the molecule of love and cuddles, trust, 
intimacy and the molecule that binds tribes. A quick online 


[PDF page 195]

SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 183 
search confirms oxytocin’s potential. ‘Oxytocin: could the 
“trust hormone” rebond our troubled world?’ asks one headline. 
“The Moral Molecule: How oxytocin can revolutionise your 
organisation’, says another. Recently I read an article that gave 
an explanation why my cocker spaniel is so overly friendly and 
clingy: oxytocin. 
One classic study published in Nature in 2005 found that 
people given sniffs of oxytocin were more willing to entrust large 
sums of money to strangers in a role-playing investment game. 
The authors concluded (in rather an overstatement) that oxytocin 
is essential for trust and’ the normal operation of human societies, 
and that oxytocin ‘contributes to economic, political and social 
success.""' A commentary by neuroscientist Antonio Damasio 
raised the disturbing prospect that the findings may result in 
political operators generously spraying crowds at their rallies 
with oxytocin. Before you fret too much about this notion, five 
subsequent studies failed to replicate the original 2005 findings.'”” 
The hype surrounding oxytocin has led to online retailers 
selling bottles of the stuff in attractively packaged glass spray 
bottles — ‘Connekt’ in blue for him, and ‘Attrakt’ in pink for her. 
‘Better Together!’ 
As you can imagine, such marketing spin results in plenty of 
neuroendocrinologists’ foreheads being banged on lab benches 
round the world. 
One problem with all human studies is that we don’t know if 
oxytocin sprayed up the nose enters the brain. And if it does, does 
it reach oxytocin receptor sites? We understand that neuropeptides 
can travel in one direction only, from brain to body, and not the 
other way round. Unlike fat-soluble hormones such as oestrogen 
ot testosterone, oxytocin and vasopressin cannot cross the blood— 
brain barrier. Some claim nasal sprays sidestep the blood—brain 
barrier; others argue we have no firm evidence." 


[PDF page 196]

184 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Naturally occurring oxytocin has some surprisingly negative 
emotional effects too. Women who breastfeed display a 
‘mama bear’ effect whereby they show more aggression when 
threatened. And oxytocin increases envy, gloating and anger, 
which, to be fair, are all approach behaviours. Anger focuses 
your attention towards the target of your anger, as does envy. 
It’s not all love and cuddles — even the love molecule has a dark, 
immoral side.'”’ 
Carter and others are particularly concerned by reports that 
state children with autism and adults with schizophrenia are 
being treated with oxytocin off-label. We have no evidence that 
autism or schizophrenia are affected by levels of oxytocin.'** 
‘We do not understand how the hormone works yet, or 
have enough information about what happens when it’s given 
repeatedly,’ Carter says in an interview with Nazure. “This is not 
a molecule that people should be self-administering or playing 
with.!"* 
At our wedding, my husband and I danced to Blut’s 
“Tender”. The song claims that love is the greatest thing that 
we have. Indeed, love is great, complex, mysterious — and more 
magnificent than a single molecule. 


[PDF page 197]

Pregnancy and 
Motherhood 
MOTHERHOOD IS THE BEGINNING OF ONE OF LIFE’S GREAT LOVE 
stories. It recalibrates our course and realigns out lives. 
This book is dedicated to my boys, Harry and Jamie, for good 
teason. Yes, I realise it is the ultimate cliché, but becoming their 
mother changed everything. Having children threw the pieces 
of my life up in the air. The pieces settled again, but my body, 
outlook on life, sense of self and emotions have never been 
quite the same. Not only did I birth two beautiful boys into the 
world, I birthed a new identity as a mother. 
My experience is not unique. For those who are mothers it’s 
one of the most fundamental transformations we go through 
as women. For many of us, parenthood brings with it identity 
changes and conflicting emotions: love, protectiveness, joy, 
nurturing, exhaustion, confusion, anger and apathy. 
During pregnancy, a cocktail of hormones prepares your 
body for birth and breastfeeding. You grow an entirely new 
organ, the placenta, to ensure your baby receives nutrients and 
to buffer her against stress. Your metabolism resets to store 
energy for foetal development and lactation. Your breasts grow 
so you can nurse. Once your baby arrives, she’s so irresistible 
185 


[PDF page 198]

186 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
you become consumed by her, and spend much of your time 
caressing, holding, feeding, gazing at her and breathing in her 
scent. ‘These maternal behaviours, as they’re called, are essential 
for the survival of your newborn. 
The same hormonal cocktail profoundly alters the 
atchitecture of your brain, in particular structures underlying 
social cognition and emotion. These brain changes last, and the 
changes in the brains and behaviours of mothers are evident 
throughout the lifespan. 
So, here’s a new way to think about pregnancy — changes to 
your body ensure your baby is carried safely to term; and changes 
to your brain ensure you're prepared for the social and emotional 
challenges of motherhood. 
Elsewhere we’ve focused on how parenting influences 
child development; here we’ll flip that picture and look at how 
children wield remarkable influence over their mother’s brain. 
Mother Nature may be a driving force during pregnancy, but 
the experience of nurturing comes to the fore after birth. 
Maternal behaviours are partly the product of the maternal brain 
networks that have been primed by the hormones of pregnancy 
and childbirth, but such behaviours are refined and reinforced 
by the experience of parenthood itself. 
In the pages that follow, Pll take you on a tour of pregnancy, 
childbirth and the early stages of motherhood. Indeed, 
ptegnancy and motherhood are accompanied by some of the 
most dramatic plasticity the female brain undergoes during life. 
Pregnancy leads to long-lasting 
changes in women’s brains 
A paper published in December 2016 in Nature Neuroscience 
gave us our first detailed insight into how pregnancy changes 


[PDF page 199]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 187 
the structure of women’s brains. Using MRI, a team of 
reseatchets led by Elseline Hoekzema scanned the brains 
of twenty-five first-time mothers before and after pregnancy, 
and compared their brains to twenty women who'd never been 
pregnant.’ 
Pregnancy was associated with pronounced and long-lasting 
grey matter shrinkage in regions of the cortex related to social 
cognition, empathy and theory of mind. The hippocampus, a 
region associated with memory, also lost volume. 
The grey matter changes induced by pregnancy were 
anything but subtle. Notably, a computer program was able to 
automatically determine whether or not a woman had undergone 
pregnancy based only on her brain scans. 
Some of the brain changes were long lasting. Iwo years after 
the initial scan, eleven of the women who hadn’t fallen pregnant 
for a second time were invited back and their brains scanned 
again. In all women, the cortical alterations had endured, but 
the hippocampus recovered volume. 
In some ways, the plastic changes are not dissimilar to those 
seen in adolescence when pubertal hormones trigger thinning 
of the PFC. It’s likely that a similar process of refinement 
and specialisation of the social brain is taking place during 
pregnancy. As I discussed in chapters 2 and 5, /oss of grey matter 
volume reflects synaptic pruning and ‘functional streamlining’ 
of circuits, not degeneration. 
Because the grey matter changes occurred in regions 
associated with theory of mind networks, Hoekzema ran a series 
of tests to see if changes were related to real-life skills. The first 
was a sutvey of maternal attachment, which included statements 
such as ‘I would describe my feelings for the baby as dislike’ or 
‘intense affection’, or ‘When I have to leave the baby: I usually 
feel rather sad’ or ‘rather relieved’. The greater the strength of 


[PDF page 200]

188 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
the bonding between a mother and her baby, the greater the 
degree of grey matter plasticity. 
Theory of mind is linked to the ability to read faces and 
emotions. An fMRI scan monitored the mother’s brain responses 
to photos of either their own or strangers’ babies. When women 
looked at photos of theit own little bundles, regions that showed 
the strongest neural activation corresponded to the regions that 
thinned during pregnancy. Looking at a baby other than their 
own had no effect on neural activity. This supported the idea 
that brain plasticity occurred 1n areas linked to social cognition, 
empathy and theory of mind. 
In rodents, the hippocampus is one of only a few brain 
regions to show neurogenesis throughout adulthood. During 
pregnancy and lactation, neurogenesis slows then recovers 
again after weaning. A similar process may account for the 
shrinkage and subsequent recovery of the hippocampus in 
women. Because the hippocampus is involved in memory, 
the team speculated that grey matter loss may be related to 
the memory problems some women report during pregnancy 
(known colloquially as ‘pregnancy brain’ or ‘baby brain’). 
Hoekzema thus conducted a series of verbal and short-term 
memory tests to see if women’s memory loss was due to 
hippocampal shrinkage. However, they found no memory 
changes during or after pregnancy. 
The process of becoming a parent for the first time is an 
intense, all-encompassing experience, so the obvious question 
to ask is whether it’s pregnancy and childbirth or the experience 
of caring for a baby that tinkers with brain structure? The 
team tested for the effects of parenting versus pregnancy in 
a rather ingenious way. They scanned the brains of first-time 
Jathers before and after their wives’ pregnancies. No alterations 
in structure were observed in men’s brains once they took on 


[PDF page 201]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 189 
dad duties, which strongly suggests the women’s brains were 
changed by pregnancy not parenting. 
One of the strengths of this study was how thorough the 
researchers were. In case you’te cutious whether method of 
conception, delivery or feeding influenced brain structure 
(we're all partial to ‘me-search te-search’), here are a few more 
details. Of the twenty-five women (average age thirty-four), 
nine achieved pregnancy by natural conception and sixteen used 
fertility treatment. Natural versus assisted conception had no 
impact on brain structure. Ten of the women had boys, eleven 
had girls, and four had twins (two mixed twins, one male twins, 
one female twins); the baby’s sex had no effect on its mothet’s 
brain. Eight of the women gave birth by Caesarean section 
and seventeen by vaginal birth; style of delivery had no impact 
on the brain. Finally, most women exclusively breastfed, two 
breastfed and supplemented with formula, and four exclusively 
bottlefed (all babies were fed!); method of feeding had no effect 
on women’s brain structure. 
It’s important to note that this study does not imply fathers 
nor non-birth mothers lack ‘parenting brain circuitry’ or a 
‘theory of mind’, and it certainly does not let dads off the hook 
from parenting! But we don’t need neuroscience to support or 
deny that fact anyway. Babies need warm, secure attachment 
with at least one parent to organise and regulate healthy brain 
development. Clearly a birth mother 1s not the only adult capable 
of being such a caregiver. 
So, what ts it about pregnancy that sculpts women’s brains? 
Hoekzema and colleagues propose it 1s ‘the unequaled surges 
of sex steroid hormones that a woman is exposed to during her 
pregnancy. Dramatic fluctuations in oestrogen, progesterone, 
prolactin, oxytocin and cortisol may drive synaptic pruning, 
gliogenesis or myelination. But MRI doesn’t have the resolution 


[PDF page 202]

190 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
to tell us this detail. Instead we need to turn our attention to the 
expectant brains of rodents. 
The expectant rodent brain 
Clearly, female rodents can’t read books to find out what to 
expect when they’re expecting; therefore, changes in how 
rodent mothers think, feel and behave must be driven entirely 
by biology. Kelly Lambert and Craig Kingsley, behavioural 
neuroscientists who study the neurobiology of parenting, say, 
‘The maternal brain is both the goal of the endocrine tsunami 
that accompanies pregnancy, and the culmination of millennia 
of natural selective processes.’ 
Pregnancy and motherhood change everything for rodents 
too. After giving birth, previously aloof female rats are 
transformed into attentive, nest-building, pup-grooming, 
nursing mamas. Because they don’t have the luxury of learning 
how to parent, pregnancy hormones must prime their brains 
to mother. At birth, pups avd maternal behaviours emerge 
simultaneously, and over subsequent days the same maternal 
behaviours are reinforced by experience — the sight, smell and 
sounds of the pups themselves. 
Motherhood makes female rodents smarter. Compared to 
their child-free sisters, mothers are superior at learning, memory, 
foraging and predatory tasks. They're braver, less anxious and 
less stressed, but more aggressive when their brood is threatened. 
Once pups ate weaned and females are faced with an empty 
nest, their newly acquired smarts persist for life. Older female 
tats who’ve had multiple pregnancies have better memories and 
show fewer signs of brain ageing than virgin sisters.'”° 
The emergence of maternal behaviours and_ superior 
cognitive abilities in rodents has been neatly mapped onto 


[PDF page 203]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD not 
‘maternal circuitry’, the hub of which is the medial preoptic 
atea (MPOA) of the hypothalamus. During labour, the sudden 
flood of oxytocin acts on receptors in the MPOA to ensure 
the maternal behaviouts emerge at the same time as the pups. 
The MPOA 1s connected to brain regions involved in reward 
and motivation, which use the ‘feel-good’ neurotransmitter, 
dopamine (perhaps suggesting motherhood is, or should be, 
inherently rewarding). 
The hippocampus — critical for memory formation, mood 
regulation and navigation — and the olfactory bulbs, critical for 
smell, also undergo plastic change during pregnancy, childbirth 
and lactation, including alterations in neuron number, neuro- 
chemistry and gene expression.'”” 
Another type of plasticity involves dendritic spines — the tiny 
buds on dendrites on which synapses form. The growth and loss 
of spines reflects the formation and elimination of synapses. 
During pregnancy, spines flourish as if they’ve been fertilised by 
the hormonal milieu. Oestrogen is a potent modulator of spine 
dynamics, typically, the more oestrogen available, the more 
spines grow. 
Do human mothers share the same maternal brain circuitry as other 
marminals? 
We suspect so. For example, brain scans of brand new human 
mothers listening to their babies’ cries show the hypothalamus 
and rewatd pathways ate activated. And Hoekzema showed that 
human mothers’ hippocampi change in size during pregnancy. 
But the big difference between humans and other animals is the 
involvement of our social brain. 
As the saying goes, ‘Nothing in biology makes sense except 
in light of evolution’, and plasticity of the rodent maternal 
brain is critical because pup sutvival depends so heavily on 
a mother’s ability to forage for food. Humans evolved under 


[PDF page 204]

192 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
very different pressures, with foraging a less essential survival 
skill for the new human mum. Traditionally, we lived in large 
family groups and raised our children under the watchful eye 
of mote experienced mothers and grandmothers. Fathers, 
siblings and cousins foraged and hunted for food, and other 
lactating mothers could supplement breastmilk. ‘his legacy of 
‘alloparenting’ has driven the evolution of our social brains, 
and is thought to drive plasticity and refinement of social 
brain networks during pregnancy.’ 
In researching this section of the book, I’ve spent countless 
hours reading blogs, articles and books on the topic of 
motherhood (clearly my own identity as a mother and woman is 
still top of mind), Again, one theme emerged as core to maternal 
wellbeing — love and social connection. It’s often said it ‘takes a 
village to raise a child’, and the ‘village’ is missing from the lives 
of so many of today’s modern women. I suspect, for some of us, 
motherhood is as solitary an activity as it is for the new rodent 
mother.'”* 
Your expectant brain and 
hormones of pregnancy 
When we first met the placenta back in chapter 1, I told you that 
this remarkable organ acts as an interface between a mother 
and her baby, moving oxygen, carbon dioxide, nutrients and 
waste; and as a buffer, selectively protecting the baby as much 
as possible from her mother’s hormones and environmental 
stressors. ‘The placenta also acts as a giant gland orchestrating 
the transition to motherhood.!”” 
Immediately after implantation, the blastocyst (fertilised egg) 
starts producing hCG (giving you the longed-for, or feared, 
thin blue line on a positive pregnancy test). During the earliest 


[PDF page 205]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 193 
stages of pregnancy, hCG maintains the corpus luteum, which 
develops in the ovary from a burst follicle. Although the exact 
reasons for the morning sickness that seventy to eighty per cent 
of women suffer in their first trimester are unknown, hCG 
usually takes the blame. 
Under direct control from the foetus and placenta, the corpus 
luteum produces progesterone, literally the ‘pro-gestation’ 
hormone. Among other roles, progesterone suppresses the 
uterus’s ability to contract, which protects against early labour, 
and supptesses fertility, preventing multiple differently timed 
pregnancies (can you just imaginep). 
After a few months, when the ovaries become unable to keep 
up with endocrine demand, the placenta takes over manufacture 
of progesterone and oestrogen. Normally, ovarian progesterone 
and oestrogen levels are kept in check via HPO-axis feedback, 
but the placenta has no such constraints placed on it, so it floods 
the mother with hormones. 
When you'te pregnant, progesterone levels increase ten- 
to fifteen-fold. And oestrogen levels increase by 1000-fold, 
exceeding the /o/a/ oestrogen exposute of the rest of your non- 
pregnant life. “The foetus and placenta certainly make a loud 
orchestrated endocrine statement that they have arrived and 
intend to stay, notes one neuroendocrinologist.“”" 
As well as the flood of sex hormones, increased levels of 
neuropeptides (short protein molecules that act in the brain) 
flow into your bloodstream, including the two quintessential 
motherhood molecules: prolactin and oxytocin. Numerous 
other ‘minor’ placental hormones and molecules are produced, 
including growth hormone, kisspeptin, serotonin and relaxin, 
but for brevity in this chapter Pll focus on those that wield most 
influence over the female brain. 


[PDF page 206]

194 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Prolactin — the quintessential hormone 
of pregnancy and parenting 
Prolactin is a hormone that lacks the PR and newspaper headlines 
of its cuddly cousin oxytocin. Nonetheless, it has an unrivalled 
range of biological roles. First discovered and named because of 
its ability to promote milk production (‘pro-lactation’), upwards 
of 300 roles have been identified, mostly related to pregnancy 
and motherhood.” 
For this chapter I spoke to Dave Grattan, a professor 
of neuroendocrinology at the University of Otago in New 
Zealand. I got to know Grattan in 1996 when I was completing 
my undergraduate degree and he arrived at Otago to set up a 
new research group. Keeping it in the family, Grattan spent his 
early career working at the University of Maryland, where he 
collaborated with the doyenne of female brain development, 
Margaret McCarthy. Grattan calls prolactin ‘the quintessential 
pregnancy hormone’ and over Skype he told me, “Pregnancy, 
lactation and motherhood change every system in the body and 
brain, and for every change we've looked at so far, prolactin is 
involved.’ 
As a parenting hormone, prolactin is highly evolutionarily 
conserved. It is associated with brooding behaviour and nest- 
building in birds, and fin-fanning behaviour in some fish to 
induce fresh water flow over their eggs.” Mammals evolved 
after fish and birds, and it’s thought prolactin was only co-opted 
as a lactation molecule later in evolution. 
When we’re not pregnant prolactin is produced by the 
anterior pituitary gland, but at only a trickle because it self- 
regulates its own secretion. During pregnancy, our remarkably 
plastic maternal brain switches ‘off’ the self-regulating 


[PDF page 207]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 195 
feedback loop allowing for a sustained period of high prolactin 
secretion.*”” 
During pregnancy, we require extra-high levels of prolactin 
and such levels can’t be sustained by the pituitary alone, so the 
placenta makes its own version to top up supplies. Placental 
lactogen is molecularly identical to prolactin, and_ easily 
slips across the blood-brain barrier to latch onto prolactin 
receptors"? 
Prolactin, hunger and resisting the urge to eat for two 
I felt prolactin’s full effect in the first trimester of my first 
pregnancy when I developed a seriously insatiable hunger, 
tempered only by an extreme aversion to vegetables. My appetite 
was primal and overwhelming, and I was gripped not so much by 
wanting to eat as needing to feed. I’m not a big breakfast person, 
but I'd easily knock back a couple of bowls of oats and bananas, 
only to be starving by 10 a.m. I imagine if I was a laboratory 
rodent I'd have been logged as ‘extremely hyperphagic’. 
Prolactin acts on hormones that regulate your sense of 
hunger and satiety (feeling full). Normally these hormones 
sensibly signal when you’te hungry or let you know when you've 
had your fill. In pregnancy, the signals are tipped towards eating 
more, which is Mother Nature’s way of ensuring there are 
sufficient nutrients for the baby, sufficient energy for the extra 
metabolic strain on yout body, and plenty of fat stores ready for 
breastfeeding. 
Herein lies the rub. During early pregnancy, prolactin is 
signalling to you to eat more, slow down and stote fat. But many 
women end up eating significantly more than 1s required to meet 
demand. This becomes a problem because some women (about 
half of pregnant women in Australia and New Zealand) are 
already overweight or obese at conception. 


[PDF page 208]

196 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Weight gain in pregnancy is a combination of many factors — 
placenta, extra blood and amniotic fluid and, of course, the 
baby — not just fat stores. I was under the care of a doctor who 
believed in weighing his patients at every visit, and looking 
back at my antenatal data charts, prolactin clearly achieved its 
fat-accumulation targets — 1 put on more than half of my total 
additional pregnancy weight before week twelve. 
Of course, your weight is not the sole indicator of health, but 
obesity at conception or gaining too much weight when you're 
pregnant is linked to increased risk for gestational diabetes, 
high blood pressure, pre-eclampsia, Caesarean section, and 
birth complications. Babies born to obese mothers are at risk 
of health problems such as heart disease and ‘Type 2 diabetes 
in later life.’ *** Excessive weight gain often means that it is 
harder to lose weight after the baby is born (if bouncing back 
is your thing). 
We're all different, but for a ‘normal’ healthy weight woman, 
the extra calories required during the first trimester can be met 
with a couple of extra pieces of fruit and half a glass of milk a day 
(the equivalent of one tiny unsatisfying snack, if you are anything 
like me). International guidelines give specific recommendations 
for pregnancy weight gain, but it won’t surprise you to learn that 
we're not very good at following them.* 
All this means is that the old-fashioned advice ‘eat for 
two’ — which made a lot of sense in the past when food was 
scatce — is not appropriate today. Instead, women are now 
warned to restrict their pregnancy weight gain, and the message 
has become, “You're vof eating for two’, which for me confusingly 
translated to, ‘Don’t listen to your body,’ 
As Grattan points out, managing healthy weight gain, 
especially for those already overweight or obese, is pitting women 
against their biology. ‘You’te destined to fail because you're 


[PDF page 209]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 197 
fighting an innate prolactin signal to eat and slow down, said 
Grattan. ‘At the same time this creates a very stressful situation, 
and we know excessive stress isn’t good for any pregnancy.’ 
Pregnant women (like all people) should be entitled to 
recetve evidence-based, compassionate and non-shaming 
care and advice. We all want to obtain optimal nutrition for 
our babies and ourselves, and weight loss or dieting is never 
encouraged during pregnancy. This is why weighing women at 
antenatal appointments 1s coming back into vogue — it opens 
the opportunity to chat about weight gain. 
Clearly, how messages about weight gain and appetite 
management during pregnancy are delivered are as important 
as the messages themselves. I recall halfway through one of my 
pregnancies, working as a journalist at a medical conference, 
when a tandom doctor approached me during morning tea 
to say, ‘You'll be more likely to have a vaginal birth if you put 
down that custard pastry. Luckily for him, prolactin also acts to 
reduce stress levels and inhibit anxiety. 
Pregnant women are less reactive to stress 
As we learned in chapter 1, the nine months before we’re born 
have the potential to shape the rest of our lives. Avoiding excess 
stress is important because cortisol pre-programs the infant’s 
HPA axis, rendering her mote reactive to stress and susceptible 
to poor health and mental illness as she grows up. 
Pregnant women have developed in-built mechanisms to 
buffer babies against stress. As a first line of defence, our entite 
HPA axis quietens, which has a noteworthy side effect: we're 
less anxious and reactive to external stressors. As a second line 
of defence, the placenta contains an enzyme that converts the 
mother’s cortisol to an inert steroid. However, the enzymatic 


[PDF page 210]

198 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
barrier can be breached by infection, inflammation or excessive 
levels of maternal cortisol. 
Because prolactin is the only hormonal signal that remains 
consistently elevated during pregnancy, it’s the prime candidate 
for HPA-axis calming, lowered stress and anxiety. 
In one experiment, researchers infused rats with prolactin 
and watched them explore a maze. Normally, non-pregnant 
rats ate pretty anxious and aren’t keen on exploring novel 
environments. Those infused with prolactin became very brave. 
They spent far more time than usual exploring and behaved like 
their adventurous pregnant sisters. In another test, rats took 
part in a ten-minute ‘swimming test’. Rats don’t like water but 
they’te able to swim well and the swimming test is an established 
method for measuring rodent anxiety. When rats were infused 
with prolactin they didn’t give up and float around helplessly in 
the water — a sure sign of excess stress, despair and anxiety — 
they scrabbled round the tank determined to find dry land.*”° 
Grattan’s team have explored the potential for prolactin 
to reduce anxiety in pregnant and lactating mice. During a 
stressful event, the hypothalamus signals to the pituitary gland 
via a hormone called corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH). 
Grattan’s team found that prolactin dampened CRH neuron 
activity, effectively inhibiting the female’s entire HPA axis.?”” 
This effect is thought to carry over to the weeks and months 
after birth when having a baby nuzzling at your breast, thus 
stimulating prolactin, keeps stress responses low. 
Prolactin’s famous cuddly cousin, oxytocin, definitely lowers 
stress responses when you're vot pregnant. However, there is little 
evidence it does this during pregnancy; oxytocin’s full effects 
don’t kick in till the first labour pains. Neither oestrogen not 
progesterone have a proven direct role in reducing stress during 
pregnancy either. Instead, a molecule called allopregnanolone, 


[PDF page 211]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 99 
made from progesterone, ticks all the stress-reduction boxes. 
It’s anti-stress, anti-depressive, anti-anxiety and anti-ageressive, 
pto-social, pro-sexual, pro-sleep and neuroprotective. 
Reduced fear, stress and anxiety during pregnancy all seem 
like worthwhile adaptive responses. Surely a calm, chilled-out 
mother-to-be is preferable to a tense, worried, sleepless wreck? 
However, being in possession of an expectant brain, a dampened 
HPA axis and reduced fear response can have some unexpected 
emotional consequences, including increased aggression, anger 
and depression. This presents a conundrum: on one hand 
women have blunted stress responses and reduced anxiety, but at 
the same time we have a greater propensity for depression. ‘his 
is perhaps a vital clue there is more going on in the expectant 
mother’s mind than only ‘bottom-up’ hormonal signalling. 
Is ‘baby brain’ a myth? 
When this book was but a twinkle in my eye, one question 
gestating in my mind was: Is pregnancy truly synonymous with 
memory loss and ditzy docile disorganisation? Or, in other 
wotds, ‘Is baby brain real?’ 
Vd always had my doubts. 
In 2007, after five years plodding along as a postdoc, I hung 
up my lab coat to pursue a science writing careet in a global 
health-communications agency. The dynamic and challenging 
role demanded mental sharpness, creativity and the ability to 
meet deadlines (academia moves at a glacial pace and when 
deadlines do exist, they’te rarely tight). Despite being nine 
weeks pregnant and starving on my first day at work, I thrived, 
and apart from the time I nearly threw a custard pastry at a 
doctor, I never considered that there was a relationship between 
the status of my womb and my capacity to perform. 


[PDF page 212]

200 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
You may be expecting me to announce that ‘baby brain’ is 
yet another item on the long list of neglected themes in female 
brain science. Surprise! It’s a very well-researched theme indeed, 
both in humans and non-human animals. 
However, there is an intriguing paradox. 
While as many as three out of every four women state they’re 
more forgetful, ‘foggy’, or lack concentration during pregnancy 
or in the early years of motherhood,” the bulk of research 
doesn’t support their experience. Most studies find pregnancy 
and motherhood have no effect on memory, and in plenty of 
studies find pregnancy zmproves cognition. 
Professor Dave Grattan goes so far as saying that baby brain 
is one of the great myths in the field of maternal neuroscience. 
‘All of the evidence suggests the contrary, he said. ‘Pregnant 
people and animals perform better than non-mothers in all 
aspects of learning and memory both during pregnancy and 
postpartum.’ As he points out, all the chemical indicators of 
pregnancy are all geared towards mental sharpness and good 
mood. Pregnant brains are flooded with the feel-good chemicals 
oxytocin and prolactin, and 1000-fold higher than usual levels 
of the cognitive enhancer oestrogen. 
A 2014 study dispelling the myth of baby brain was published 
in The Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology. 
Researchers were curious how memory and attention changed 
with pregnancy and childbirth. They recruited forty-two 
pregnant women, and had them complete a comprehensive 
battery of neuropsychological tests. Women were tested for 
verbal and spatial memory, attention, language skills, executive 
abilities and mood, and testing was repeated three and six 
months after babies were born.*” 
For every neuropsychological test, including memory, 
pregnant women and mothers performed equally as well as a 


[PDF page 213]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 201 
matched group of 21 child-free women. There were only two 
sipnificant differences between pregnancy and motherhood 
versus being childfree. The first was mood — as you might expect, 
pregnancy and motherhood lowered mood. The second was 
self-reported memory. Pregnant women and mothers consistently 
claimed their memory was poor or they were ‘doing badly 
on the tests’. Surprisingly, their attitudes about poor memory 
persisted even when the researchers provided them with their 
test scores — clear evidence to the contrary. ‘I was surprised at 
how strong the feeling was that they weren’t performing well, 
said Michael Larson, lead author of the study. 
This type of result has been replicated numerous times. 
One Australian study found that despite their belief they were 
suffering ‘baby brain’, pregnant women performed better 
on tests of memory than non-pregnant women. ‘Pregnancy 
may confer an advantage in memory rather than a deficit and 
women’s complaints of memory performance may be influenced 
by “false expectations”’, concluded the researchers.*"” Another 
study found that what changed with pregnancy wasn’t cognitive 
skills but ‘the women’s petception of themselves’.*" 
Why do so many pregnant women say they suffer from “baby 
brain’ when objective testing concludes the oppositer 
Katherine Ellison is a journalist who has written an entire 
book on the phenomenon of ‘baby brain’. In The Mommy Brain: 
How Motherhood Makes Us Smarter, Ellison explains the notion 
atose in the 1960s when women entered the workplace in 
droves.” ‘This change brought new scrutiny from others — 
and a new self-consciousness for mothers, she writes. Ellison 
suggests that blaming ‘baby brain’ is our current cop-out for 
when we inevitably find our attention divided or we relax our 
guard, even for a moment. Baby brain is ‘our frequent alibi 
when we say something dumb’, and we're supported in this 


[PDF page 214]

202 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
pessimistic belief by three out of four of our friends. The myth 
persists because of confirmation bias, whereby we selectively 
look for evidence that supports the cultural expectation. We’re 
trained to expect to forget, so when we do we’ve got a ready- 
made reason why. 
Reading the ‘baby brain’ literature, I’m reminded of Sarah 
Romans’ findings concerning cultural beliefs and stereotypes 
around the emotional rollercoaster of hormones, menstrual 
cycles and PMS. It seems to me that ‘baby brain’ is another 
expectation we’ve absorbed without question. Larson and his 
team also muse over the power of cultural stereotypes in their 
paper and suggest the belief emphasising cognitive decline as 
‘inevitable’ with pregnancy is related to ‘the perception of a 
woman as emotional and at the mercy of their hormones during 
their menstrual cycle’. 
To be fair, there are studies that find small reductions in 
memory or attention for some women in the third trimester of 
pregnancy, and especially and unsurprisingly in the first few 
postpartum days when the shock of childbirth is fresh and 
sleep is hard to come by. Sleep is key for healthy cognitive 
function, and we know the later stages of pregnancy are 
accompanied by restless nights. The combination of cortisol 
keeping you hyper-alert, an uncomfortable bump, aching 
joints softened by relaxin, and the nervous anticipation of 
the impending arrival is a cocktail recipe for insomnia and 
consequent forgetfulness. 
For balance, let’s consider a few alternative explanations 
for the paradox. Namely, the proposition that the problem 
isn’t with women’s perceptions ~ rather, it’s with how memory 
is tested in the lab. 
Some researchers have argued that ‘baby brain’ or ‘brain fog’ 
might simply be too difficult to measure in a tesearch setting. 


[PDF page 215]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 203 
In the next chapter you'll learn that a similar paradox exists for 
sleep — though women complain they’ve had a terrible night’s 
sleep, laboratory tests reveal they slept soundly. One idea is that 
laboratory tests aren’t calibrated to pick up the nuanced changes 
in cognition that women ate very attuned to. Perhaps inviting 
weaty pregnant women or exhausted new mothers to sit quietly 
alone in a room to complete a structured recall test doesn’t quite 
match the reality of keeping mentally sharp and on the ball in 
the everyday real world. They probably relish the peace and 
quiet, and as such ace the tests! 
Pregnancy and motherhood, especially the first time around, 
refocus your attention inwards. Back in the 1950s, English 
paediatrician Donald Winnicott famously termed refocused 
attention ‘primary maternal preoccupation ... a condition of 
heightened sensitivity in which the mother focuses on the infant 
to the exclusion of all else’. In their classic book The Birth of a 
Mother: How the Motherhood Experience Changes You Forever, Daniel 
Stern and Nadia Bruschweiler-Stern write about the entirely new 
mindset of mothers: “he motherhood mindset pushes her pre- 
existing mental life aside and rushes forward to fill the centre 
stage of her inner life, giving it a different make up entirely.?" 
I may have a touch of confirmation bias based on my 
experiences, but ’'m of the same mind as Ellison and Larson. 
‘Somebody might learn about this and say, “I am thinking okay 
even though I am pregnant.” It might improve their quality of 
life, 1t might improve how they are functioning — they might start 
believing in themselves, says Larson. Ellison states, ‘Mommy 
Brain should be thought of less as a cerebral handicap and more 
as an advantage in the lifelong task of becoming smart.’ Imagine 
if the research supported the cultural myth and was co-opted 
to discriminate against pregnant women and mothers in the 
workplace. Let’s do ourselves a favour and rewrite the story. 


[PDF page 216]

204 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Are labour pains needed for brain gains? 
My second-born loves to hear the story of his birth. I suspect 
it’s because Bear Grylls has a walk-on role. I’ll save you all the 
details, but one evening while ] was eating a bowl of gnocchi 
and green pesto watching Bear do outdoorsy upside-down 
things involving logs and river crossings, I felt a painful yet 
familiar twinge: “Oh, yes, now I remember, I thought to 
myself. ‘Mum was right!’ Mum had always told me when she 
went into labour with my younger sister the first contraction 
brought labour memories flooding back. For most women, the 
pain of labour is ranked as severe, but memories dim over time. 
It turns out there’s nothing like those first few contractions to 
remind you. 
I was ten days early when I went into labour the second time 
round, but like every pregnant woman ever, I'd already Googled 
“Tips to jump start labour’ and had come across all the usual 
ideas: curry, pineapple, acupuncture, sex, nipple squeezing, 
walking, and my yoga teacher taught me a ‘labour induction haka’ 
which involved a lot of deep squatting, stomping and huffing. 
No-one really knows what triggers labour. Medical science 
offers as many options as Google, and plenty of researchers 
are working on the issue, especially for the prevention of pre- 
term labour. ‘The timing involves complex interactions between 
mother, baby and the placenta. What needs to happen is a shift 
in balance from a quiescent uterus and tightly closed cervix to a 
contracting uterus and soft dilated cervix and, of course, a baby 
mature enough to face the world. 
Evety woman’s experience of pain during labour varies 
greatly. I went into my first birth assuming I’d be like my sister 
and the pain would be ‘good pain’. I was floored when it wasn’t! 


[PDF page 217]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 205 
Some women (like my sister) feel less pain while others find the 
pain extremely distressing (me). 
The story goes that a ‘natural’ vaginal delivery sets off a 
cascade of hormones, which are necessary for feelings of love and 
tenderness towatds your baby. Love 1s your ‘reward’ for labour 
pain. Skin-to-skin contact and breastfeeding immediately upon 
delivery nurture this sequence. You may have heard that the same 
cascade is absent when Caesarean section or pain relief is used. 
Or you may have heard, as I did during a conference I recently 
attended, that women should ‘lean in to the pain of childbirth’ 
because doing otherwise is ‘denying your divine feminine’ and 
‘rejecting your role as mother’. (The speaker was a man. And I 
made plenty of disparaging snorty sounds at the back of the room.) 
Contemplating the relative contributions of the events 
sutrounding birth (nature) versus interactions between mother 
and infant (nurture) is walking-on-eggshells territory. Typically, 
most studies have limitations, but the bigger problem I see 1s 
that they get co-opted and used to fuel guilt among mothers 
who, for whatever reason, didn’t give birth ‘the way nature 
intended’. For example, one study used fMRI to compare the 
brains of mothers who delivered vaginally versus via Caesarean 
section. During the first month postpartum, mothers from the 
vaginal-delivery group exhibited greater neural tesponses to 
their own babies’ cries compared to mothers who delivered via 
Caesarean section. However, the difference between the groups 
of mothers disappeared by three to four months postpartum.*" 
Certainly, there is evidence that Caesarean birth delays skin- 
to-skin contact and breastfeeding, but only by minutes or hours. 
Although there may sometimes be short-term effects, the way yout 
baby comes into the world doesn’t impact on maternal feelings. It’s 
entirely possible to feel ambivalent towards your baby after vaginal 
birth, or completely consumed with love after a Caesarean section. 


[PDF page 218]

206 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Similarly, there is no good evidence that choosing an epidural 
(as I did) interferes with breastfeeding or maternal feelings (it 
didn’t for me). There is no critical period or requirement for 
pain to be felt by the mother via which the mother—infant bond 
becomes activated.?'° Certainly, having a baby come out of your 
vagina doesn’t flick a ‘mummy switch’ on in your brain. 
If I think about the gorgeous group of women in my 
mothers’ group, there’s no way you'd have been able to divide us 
into two groups based on the quality of our parenting and birth 
method — vaginal-birth-loving mothers and detached Caesarean 
birthers (to even suggest so would be met with some serious eye 
rolls and sharp words). 
Suffice to say, for all Mother Nature’s provisions to ensure 
labour, delivery and maternal affection, she is neither benevolent 
nor benign. Today, many women are in the privileged position 
of being able to override her wishes with modern science-based 
medicine, which massively ups the ante in favour of maternal 
and newborn safety, survival and reduced birth trauma. And if 
you so choose, you can labour pain free. 
Pregnancy and childbirth may provide the neural scaffold 
upon which maternal behaviours are built, but human parenting 
is not hormone dependent. The experience of nurturing a baby 
stimulates the hormones oxytocin and prolactin without the 
need for pregnancy and childbirth. This is the case for fathers, 
non-birth parents and other family members. It is via the act 
of nurturing that attachments form and love grows. 
This is why babies cry 
Immediately following birth, non-human animals instinctively 
care for their young, feed them and defend them. Typically, 
we do too — we smother our baby with kisses, count theit 


[PDF page 219]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 207 
fingers and toes, and soak in their delicious newborn smell. 
We become captivated with our babe, a process not dissimilar 
to falling in love. 
As [ve mentioned, pregnancy hormones are not necessary 
for successful attachment and parenting. Even virgin rats can 
learn how to mother simply by practising. One of the classic 
studies 1n the field showed that when standoffish virgin rats were 
continuously housed with strange pups, they eventually showed 
maternal behaviours: they retrieved pups to a single location, 
licked them, built nests and adopted a nursing posture over them 
despite not lactating. It took seven to ten days of ‘pup exposure’, 
but with experience non-birth mothers eventually learned how 
to carte. Subsequent studies building on this finding showed 
that pregnancy and birth simply reduce the amount of time it 
takes to induce caregiving behaviours — birth mothers ‘mother’ 
immediately; fathers and non-birth mothers eventually form very 
close attachments too. It just takes a little patience and time.*”° 
Because babies ate born with an innate and powerful 
biological need to be loved, they behave in ways that ensure the 
formation of that bond. Before she can hold your gaze, smile or 
use her words to let you know what’s wrong, crying is a baby’s 
most powerful tool of communication. And one of the ways in 
which a newborn elicits a response from her parent or caregiver 
is by crying. 
All babies cry. And from your infant’s point of view, crying is 
essential for her survival. 
Indeed, all newborn mammals cry, and different species, 
including humans, produce remarkably similar sounds. So much 
so, playing the sound of a wailing infant from one species will 
bring adults from another species running. One study found 
that wild adult deer responded to the cries of baby marmots, 
seals, cats, bats and humans. When I played my cocker spaniel 


[PDF page 220]

208 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
the recording supplied by researchers he too pricked up his ears 
217 then bounded over to sniff at my laptop.” The theory goes that 
all adult mammals are ‘wired to respond’ to a baby crying. 
Investigations typically use fMRI to test a mother’s brain 
response to their own versus another infant’s cries. Nearly every 
study of human parents finds that the regions that thin during 
pregnancy become activated when listening to infant wails. A 
handful of studies have found fathers respond to babies’ cries 
too. (Who knew?) Maternal brain researcher Ruth Feldman 
found greater amygdala activation in mothers versus greater 
cortical activation in fathers in response to their infant’s tears. 
Feldman suggests that while the hormones of pregnancy may 
chart a unique“bottom-up’ limbic path to mothering, in fathers 
paternal cate is constructed in a top-down and _ outside-in 
fashion via the experience of parenting.“ 
Interacting with their children increases oxytocin, prolactin, 
cortisol and even oestrogen in men. Testosterone levels decline 
in ‘hands-on’ fathers, either in response to or to facilitate 
empathy and caregiving.*" In terms of hormones and parenting, 
it’s hard to tease out cause and effect. Nonetheless, interacting 
with babies seems to modulate their fathers’ hormones and 
activate neural circuitry in ways that are similar to those in 
mothers. 
This is your brain on breastfeeding 
‘He was born to feed, was the first comment made by a 
midwife about my firstborn son, ‘and so ate those nipples!’ 
Pve often reminded my eldest of that comment over the years 
(about his ability, not mine); he’s still a good eater and is 
famous for religiously scoffing eight or nine Weet-Bix every 
morning. I’ve tried to marinate in the praise lavished on my 


[PDF page 221]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 209 
bosom, but I find it’s not something I can easily bring up as a 
humble brag (although this book has finally given me a vehicle 
to do so). 
If you’ve given birth, it’s likely those around you will have 
developed a closer than usual relationship with your breasts. 
We're mammals, after all, and the defining feature of all 
female mammals is our ability to produce milk and feed it to 
our offspring. Of course, breastfeeding doesn’t come naturally 
to every mother and baby, therefore a disclaimer: in the next 
few paragraphs I may use the term ‘maternal behaviours’ as an 
umbrella term that includes lactation. This does not imply that 
women who choose to bottlefeed, or who can’t breastfeed, or 
parents who don’t have breasts, or any other loving, affectionate 
carer of a child are not exhibiting ‘maternal behaviours’. Breast 
may be ‘best’ (as the WHO states) but a happy, healthy baby is a 
fed baby, wherever that milk comes from. 
Pregnancy prepares our brains and our breasts for 
motherhood. Our bosoms grow and alveoli (milk ducts) develop 
under the influence of oestrogen and prolactin. High oestrogen 
and progesterone levels prevent actual milk production, but 
delivery of the placenta resulting in a sudden drop in their levels 
results in milk ‘coming 1’. 
After birth, breasts and alveoli continue to grow and the 
maintenance of milk production and the control of milk let- 
down remain under hormonal control. But those hormones are 
now under control of your baby. Suckling stimulates oxytocin 
that causes smooth muscle contraction and ejection of milk. 
In time, the mere thought of feeding your baby stimulates the 
extraordinary sensation of let-down. Suckling also stimulates 
prolactin, which maintains milk production. Importantly, 
oxytocin and prolactin act in the brain to modulate behaviours, 
thoughts and feelings. 


[PDF page 222]

210 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Breastfeeding mothers differ in a few subtle ways from non- 
lactating parents. ‘I'hey report lower stress and negative moods, 
mote sensitivity to positive emotional cues and less sensitivity to 
negative, threat-related cues and anxiety than non-breastfeeding 
mothers.?”” Lowered anxiety is matched by changes in heart- 
tate variability, reduced blood pressure and reduced cortisol 
responses to stress. 
Have you heard the saying ‘Never come between a mother 
bear and her cubs’? This is an apt description of a breastfeeding 
mother. In one study, researchers recruited forty mothers with 
babies aged three to six months, half of whom were exclusively 
breastfeeding. Women were assessed using measures of anger, 
ageression and hostility including psychological interviews and 
a ‘set-up’ where a researcher posing as another mother provoked 
hostile reactions during a game. Mothers who exclusively breast- 
fed their infants were almost fice as aggressive as women who 
weren't breastfeeding. They also had lower blood pressure, 
which was taken as an indication of lowered arousal and reduced 
stress response.*7! 
When a mother bear lashes out at an intruder, her response is 
called ‘lactation aggression’ or ‘maternal defence’. While it might 
sound counterintuitive, aggression is an ‘approach behaviour’. 
If your baseline stress and fear levels are low, you’re braver and 
more able to get up close and in someone’s face. 
I clearly recall my first ‘mother bear’ response about two days 
after my first son was born and a nurse came to perform his heel 
prick, a harmless blood test that screens for a variety of genetic 
disorders. Predictably, he screamed and my response to his pain 
was instantaneous and primal. I had to hold myself back from 
shoving the nurse away and curling myself over his little body 
to keep him safe. After she left all I could do was cry, partly 
in empathy at his pain but mostly because it had dawned on 


[PDF page 223]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 211 
me that I was a mother, and I was behaving in ways I didn’t 
recognise. 
Breastfeeding and the neural control of fertility 
Around the same day as the heel-prick incident, I dutifully 
went along to a postnatal education class run by the hospital 
midwives. | was sitting very gingerly on one bum cheek when, 
much to the bemusement of the room, the topic of postpartum 
contraception was raised (by a midwife, not a fresh new mum). 
In addition to the usual methods of contraception (the pill, 
1UDs, condoms and the like) we were told about the lactational 
amenorthoea method (LAM). LAM 1s a natural birth control 
technique based on the fact that lactation causes amenorrhoea 
(lack of menstruation). It’s Mother Nature’s way of providing a 
natural delay in your return to fertility and spacing babies more 
optimally. 
Here’s the theory of why, in a perfect scenario, LAM works: 
a suckling baby stimulates the release of prolactin. Prolactin 
blocks kisspeptin and GnRH (fck-tok-tick), thus suppressing 
ovulation. No ovulation means no chance of an egg-meets- 
sperm (locks in and is the winner!) event. 
Some non-pregnant or non-breastfeeding people (males 
and females) make too much prolactin, known medically as 
hyperprolactinaemia. If you produce too much prolactin you're 
rendered infertile. One common cause is a type of pituitary 
tumour that secretes excessive levels of prolactin; other times 
the cause is genetic. In women hyperprolactinaemia prevents 
ovulation and menstruation, and causes infertility and 
sometimes milk production without pregnancy. Some infertility 
drugs bypass prolactin and kisspeptin to stimulate GnRH 
release directly, and some researchers are exploring the potential 
for kisspeptin as an infertility treatment.?” 


[PDF page 224]

212 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
The WHO that states breastfeeding is ninety-eight per cent 
effective in preventing pregnancy, but only if you're able to 
answer ‘yes’ to these three questions: 
Have you had a period since your baby was born? 
No Is your baby less than six months old? 
3. Are you nursing your baby on demand day and night, 
and waiting no longer than four hours between feedings 
during the day and six hours between feedings at night, 
with no pacifiers or supplementary bottles? 
Fail to answer ‘Yes’ to all three and you'll need an alternative 
method of contraception (unless you're planning another 
pregnancy). Some proponents such as La Leche League claim 
that mothers who closely follow the LAM ‘tenets of ecological 
breastfeeding’ will experience an average of fourteen months 
menstruation free. Of course, these criteria may or may not be 
achievable for every family, so LAM is not recommended as a 
fail-safe method. Mother Nature is not infallible. 
Depression and motherhood 
Pregnancy and motherhood made me feel like I'd finally joined 
the human race. But at the same time, I didn’t have a clue who I 
was anymore. I’ve often commented that it wasn’t looking after 
my boys that made motherhood so emotionally challenging, it 
was managing myself. Motherhood is viewed as both a natural 
and sacred role — the epitome of bliss, serenity and fulfilment as 
a woman. For many women it is nothing of the sort. 
In chapter 6, I described some reasons for the gender gap 
in anxiety and depression. Skewing the stats are the uniquely 
female experiences of pregnancy and motherhood. Your 


[PDF page 225]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 213 
emotions ensure you’te sensitive to your baby’s needs, but brain 
plasticity comes at a cost and leaves you vulnerable to developing 
mood disorders. 
The baby blues 
In my postnatal education classes, the focus was very much 
on the days and weeks immediately following birth as the 
vulnerable window for mcod disorders. There is voluminous 
information on antenatal and postpartum depression, including 
plenty of cookie-cutter advice on mental health prevention — ask 
for help, sleep when baby sleeps, eat well and exercise. 
We hear a lot about postnatal depression (PND), but far 
less about depression during pregnancy. Antenatal depression, 
as it’s called, affects around one in ten mothers during their 
pregnancy. Reasons for feeling blue, deeply depressed or anxious 
during pregnancy vary, but are not dissimilar to the causes at 
other times of life: combinations of lack of social support and 
a good dose of rumination, stressful life events, the thought 
of impending motherhood, but with the addition of hormonal 
change. Women who've suffered mood disorders before falling 
pregnant are the most vulnerable to antenatal depression.*” 
First-week baby blues are most likely due to the dramatic 
withdrawal from the high levels of hormones produced by the 
placenta. There’s a sort of postpartum swing away from feel- 
good neurotransmitters and hormones, and a swing towards 
those that induce low mood. In principle, oxytocin and prolactin 
as a tesult of breastfeeding and loving your newborn should 
buffer low postnatal mood (all good in theory, clearly not always 
good in practice). 
The thing is, motherhood doesn’t magically become carefree 
and joyous after baby’s first birthday. If anything, the years 
that follow continue to wear you down bit by bit, making the 


[PDF page 226]

214 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
emergence of mood disorders more likely than in the early 
postpartum months. 
This concept has support from the Australian Longitudinal 
Study on Women’s Health (ALSWH) which, since the 1990s, 
has followed 58000 women born in the 1920s, 1950s and 1970s. 
A survey of 9145 women in the 1970s cohort found that mothers 
with older children (over twelve months) reported lower scores 
of wellbeing and mental health than women with babies under 
twelve months.*** That is, the longer women were mothers, the 
worse their mental health. 
Depression and the myths of motherhood 
How can motherhood — sold to us as a woman’s most fulfilling 
and rewarding life experience — be connected to the development 
of depression? 
Daniel Stern argues that the birth of a mother does not take 
place in one dramatic defining moment but ‘gradually emerges 
from the cumulative work of the many months that precede and 
follow the actual birth of the baby’. In a sense, a mother is ‘born 
psychologically much as her baby is born physically’, he writes. 
‘What a woman gives birth to in her mind is not a new human 
being but a new identity and sense of being a mother.’*"° 
Children bring about a change in your priorities, your 
relationships and the identity you’ve very carefully constructed 
since gitlhood. The transformation to motherhood is often 
filled with deep dissatisfaction, resentment, guilt, shame and 
even ambivalence. I certainly found myself conflicted by my 
expectations and my experiences of motherhood. 
To explore the conflict between the myths and realities, 
Professor Jane Ussher conducted a series of interviews with 
women, concentrating on mothers whose eldest child was aged 
between one and three. She was curious if motherhood was 


[PDF page 227]

PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 215 
what they expected it to be. She interviewed women with older 
children because she hoped they’d no longer be caught up with 
the minutiae of baby care, and they might reflect more clearly 
on the practical and psychological changes of motherhood. 
Also, these women should still have reasonably clear memories 
of life before kids.?”° 
For all women, the reality of motherhood was ‘totally different’ 
from what they had expected. Women became disillusioned 
on two counts, she says: by discovering that motherhood had 
ovetwhelmed, rather than enhanced, their identities as women, 
and by ‘finding that the dominant societal discourses of 
motherhood were misleading’. The sheer drudgery of parenting 
exposed the popular images of the ‘attractive, perfectly dressed 
and made-up mother, with her happy, smiling family’ as a myth. 
‘Motherhood did not equate with womanhood, as expected, it 
engulfed it, writes Ussher. 
Ussher and others have proposed that it’s the disillusionment 
arising from the conflict between the myth and reality that causes 
depression, especially if there are other problems and pressures. 
Motherhood for me has been a case study in resolving the 
conflict between myth and teality. I only wish I’d learned sooner 
that my experience wasn’t quite so unique. 
Once a mother, always a mother 
Motherhood is the one relationship guaranteed to irrevocably 
alter us. As we build lives for ‘we’ not ‘me’, we learn that life’s ups 
and downs, milestones, opportunities and risks are enmeshed 
with other people. Parenting requites us to repeatedly deploy 
cognitive skills such as planning, organisation, working memory, 
flexibility, attention and decision-making. We practise and refine 
empathy, emotional regulation and resilience. All the evidence 


[PDF page 228]

216 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
from non-human animals suggests that motherhood bestows a 
cognitive advantage. Mothers also live longer and are protected 
against brain ageing. As we'll discuss in the final chapter of this 
book, there is evidence for a link between motherhood, good 
health and longevity. 
Sheila Kitzinger, the famous childbirth educator and social 
anthropologist, writes, “Childbirth might be the grand finale of 
pregnancy, but it opens the door on a completely new experience, 
and lengthy learning process that never finishes however old the 
children are.’ She has a point. Parenting is a process (I’m tempted 
to use the word journey’), and at each stage of our children’s 
development we’re faced with new challenges, decisions to 
make, dilemmas to solve and new emotional storms to navigate. 
Rather like a brain-training game, parenting pushes us to upskill 
with each new level. 


[PDF page 229]

Menopause 
APOLOGIES. I REALISE WE’VE SKIPPED FROM MOTHERHOOD TO 
menopause; from fecundity to the free-fall of fertility, without 
a break 1n which to enjoy midlife. (For what it’s worth, I 
considered inserting the chapter on mental health here, but that 
seemed a rather depressing option.) As I write this chapter, I 
too find myself rather reluctantly in the early stages of ‘midlife’, 
what ’ve come to think of as the old age of youth and the youth 
of old age. My oldest son has been earth-side for a decade, but 
menopause still seems like something my mother once did with 
her friends, certainly not something that will become a reality 
for me within the next few years. 
Older friends have told me that menopause is the last taboo, 
and there certainly seems to be a stigma talking about the 
‘climacteric’ (as it’s sometimes called). Rather like ‘period dramas’, 
most of the menopausal stories are extraordinarily negative. I’ve 
heard stories of take-the-world-in-their-stride women giving up 
work, previously upbeat women being prescribed antidepressants, 
divorce, lost libidos, fear of ‘cancer-causing’ hormone therapies, 
and duelling hormonal houses where pubertal teens and 
menopausal mothers collide. One friend told me about the 
217 


[PDF page 230]

218 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
inctedible panic attacks she’s started experiencing. British artist 
Tracey Emin commented, ‘It’s horrible ... it is the beginning of 
dying? and Oprah spoke of her life force ‘being slowly drained’. 
Burying my head in the literature, ’'ve found that, as with 
puberty, periods and labour pain, when it comes to menopause 
we're all different. As Kaz Cooke writes, one woman’s ‘powet- 
surging goddess-affirming blessed-relief graduation from 
her reproductive years’ is another woman’s ‘nasty hormonal 
nightmare hot-flashy forgetting faff-about, complete with mad 
spotty periods’.*** My balm has been my mum who, despite 
being famous in our family for her sensitivity to hot and cold, 
didn’t find the experience as troubling as some of her friends 
(thankfully, women and their daughters and sisters often have 
similar timing and experiences of menopause). 
Pve learned that about twenty per cent of women will have 
symptoms so severe that they significantly interfere with daily 
life; another twenty per cent will sail through with no symptoms 
at all, leaving sixty per cent of women experiencing mild to 
moderate symptoms. Your genes, general level of health and 
wellbeing, previous experience of mood problems, cultural 
expectations, exposure to stressful life events, and whether your 
menopause is natural, surgical or chemotherapy-induced all 
impact the experience. 
The good news is that once you move from peri-menopause 
(the years leading up to your last period) into post-menopause, 
hormones level out and symptoms typically settle. The 
Melbourne Women’s Midlife Health Project has found that most 
women feport a greater sense of wellbeing, better moods, less 
depression and even a better sex life in their fifties and sixties. 
For many women, late midlife means children have left the nest 
and they discover a renewed lust for life and the confidence to be 
themselves regardless of the opinions or reactions of others.22” 


[PDF page 231]

MENOPAUSE 219 
Whether you experience a gentle goddess path or horrible 
hormonal hell, menopause signifies the end of fertility. 
As your ovaries wind down their duties and head towards 
retirement, the ovarian-brain conversation falters, then 
disconnects altogether. We tend to think of menopause as 
the final reproductive life transition, but the symptoms of hot 
flashes, changes in sleep, mood and memorty are largely due to 
changes in the brain. Menopause opens a window of neural 
vulnerability for the development of mood disorders, insomnia 
and cognitive change. It’s when bottom-up biology (running 
out of eggs) paves the way for outside-in and top-down risk 
factors to wield a little more power than normal. 
There are hundreds of books, articles and online resources 
on the menopausal transition. Rather than repeating much 
of that information, in this chapter [ll describe ‘the change’ 
from a brain health perspective with a particular focus on the 
neurobiology of hot flashes, sleep, mood and memory. In 
the second half of this chapter, Pll explore various treatments 
with a focus on hormone therapies (including hormone 
replacement therapy — HRT) for symptoms of menopause. I’ll 
take a look at the historical controversies and the current best 
practice evidence-based advice being given to women. 
A quick guide to the stages of menopause 
In Australia, the average age for natural menopause is fifty- 
one, but it can occur earlier or later. If you have your last 
period before the age of forty you’ve experienced ‘premature 
menopause’, although sometimes this 1s referred to as ‘primary 
ovarian insufficiency’. ‘Early menopause’ is when your last 
period happens before the age of forty-five. Menopause 
may also happen as a result of chemotherapy or radiotherapy 


[PDF page 232]

220 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
treatment for cancer, or when ovaries ate removed surgically 
(oophorectomy). In the case of surgical menopause, hormone 
levels drop rapidly, and severe menopause symptoms may be 
triggered within days. 
Menopause is defined as twelve consecutive months 
without a menstrual period. Every day that follows 1s post- 
menopause, a phase that can make up a third of your life 
or more. Perimenopause (‘around menopause’) is defined as 
the years leading up to menopause, and it can start five to 
ten yeats before your last period. Menopause happens because 
you eventually run out of eggs, and the wide age range during 
which women reach menopause (anywhere between forty to 
fifty-eight yeats — fifty-one is just the average) reflects numbers 
of eggs and the rate of egg loss, which varies greatly between 
women.”** 
Perimenopause 1s physiologically different from post- 
menopause. During perimenopause, the HPO axis that has 
been running smoothly since menarche starts to sputter and, 
as such, the time is characterised by erratic and unpredictable 
hormone production. Gynaecologist Tara Allmen says 
in her excellent book Menopause Confidential that during 
perimenopause our ovaries can still make oestrogen, but just 
not reliably and in the right quantity. ‘Sometimes they make 
too much oestrogen. Sometimes they make too little. And 
other times they get it just right.’ There is no month-to-month 
predictability as to how oestrogen production will perform. 
It’s the rollercoaster of ovarian hormones in perimenopause, 
rather than the flat tramline of post-menopause, that causes 
many of the ‘menopausal’ symptoms. 
You could liken menopause to puberty in reverse. Unlike 
puberty, the brain is not the conductor of the menopausal 
orchestra. Instead, dwindling egg supplies direct the final 


[PDF page 233]

MENOPAUSE 221 
performance. In time, the brain — like the body — learns to 
function without oestrogen. Women living well decades past 
theit menopause ate testament to this fact. 
Why do we go through menopause? 
Our rodent friends, who do so much sacrificial work to 
inform us about our own brains, also undergo a reproductive 
senescence. Ageing female rats show a decline in egg numbers, 
irregular cycling, irregular fertility, hormone fluctuations and 
insensitivity to oestrogen. Then they die. As do almost all 
female mammals once they’te no longer fertile. 
Healthy human women can expect to live a good thirty to 
forty years following reproductive senescence. Besides humans, 
we know of only two other species of mammals that live well 
past their reproductive prime: orca whales (also known as killer 
whales) and short-finned pilot whales. 
Why do women (and some whales) go through menopause 
but not dier 
The most popular idea 1s the ‘grandmother theory’, which 
proposes that the wise grandma contributes to her ‘genetic 
legacy’ by living on to help her grandchildren survive and 
thrive by sharing wisdom. Grandmothers babysit and remember 
tribal lore about how to live through floods, famines and other 
hardships. If grandmothers remained fertile, they'd be busy 
selfishly raising infants of their own and would be less likely to 
devote time to the tribe. 
It’s been suggested that menopause in humans 1s simply an 
artefact of our modern lifestyles — we live longer thanks to 
modern medicine. But a famous 2015 study published in Current 
Biology supports the ‘grandmother as wise matriarch’ notion.” 
The authors reported on a nine-year study of orcas that spend 


[PDF page 234]

222 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
their summers wallowing in the waters off the southern tip 
of Vancouver Island in Canada. Like humans, orcas breed 
between the ages of twelve and forty, go through menopause, 
then survive well into their nineties. Using the knowledge and 
experience built up over many summers, the wise menopausal 
matriarchs took on important leadership roles in their pod. 
They were the ones in charge of leading others to find salmon, 
particularly when the fish were scarce, and their pods thrived. 
In short: mothers breed, grandmothers feed. 
Are your menopause symptoms 
all in your head? 
Many women transition through menopause without any health 
issues and remain healthy in the decades that follow. Some 
women, however, become vulnerable to the neurological shifts 
that can occur during the transition and are thus at increased 
risk of unhealthy brain ageing. 
If you've experienced menopause, it may come as no surprise 
to you that oestrogen receptors (which are now looking a little 
empty and neglected) are found in the same brain regions that 
tegulate temperature, sex drive, sleep, emotions, attention 
and memory. Changes in oestrogen signalling (either through 
changes in oestrogen levels or changes in oestrogen receptors) 
will directly affect how these numerous brain circuits function, 
although the exact mechanisms by which menopause alters 
brain physiology to generate symptoms isn’t clear. 
One working hypothesis focuses on the metabolic link 
between oestrogen and healthy cell function. Our brains 
metabolise twenty per cent of our energy supplies, and the 
brain’s main fuel supply is glucose. In women, oestrogen 
supports the biochemical pathways that use insulin and generate 


[PDF page 235]

MENOPAUSE 223 
energy from glucose. So the menopausal drop in oestrogen 
might change how efficiently the brain uses glucose and in turn 
how well neurons function.” 
The link between oestrogen and glucose metabolism plays out 
mote clearly in women who have their ovaries temoved before 
they go through menopause — the abrupt drop in oestrogen 
levels is associated with an increased risk of developing ‘Type 2 
diabetes. The same increased risk for Type 2 diabetes is seen 
after natural menopause, whereas for women using hormone 
therapy, glucose metabolism is typically normal.” **! Pll save 
the lifestyle lecture for another time, but the link between 
oestrogen, glucose metabolism and Type 2 diabetes highlights 
the importance of self-care and attention to exercise and healthy 
eating for women as they age. 
This is your brain on hot flashes 
Hot flashes (also called hot flushes) are the most common 
menopausal symptom and some say the defining feature of 
the fertility free-fall. Roughly seventy-five to eighty per cent of 
women experience what doctors call ‘vasomotor symptoms’. For 
some, they’re the one and only symptom. For others, they occur 
alongside insomnia, depression and brain fog. 
Hot flashes may feel like a full-body experience but they’re 
regulated by that busiest of brain regions, the hypothalamus. 
Body temperatute is regulated between set thresholds within a 
few tenths of a degree above or below 37°C by watrm-sensitive 
neurons in the pre-optic area of the hypothalamus, which 
increase ot decrease their firing rate in response to rises or falls 
in cote temperature. We have an upper threshold for heat and 
a lower threshold for cold. Much like a neural thermostat, the 
hypothalamus detects when our core temperature crosses one 


[PDF page 236]

224 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
of these thresholds and signals the body into action. If you're 
too hot you'll sweat, your blood vessels will vasodilate and 
youll flush red (my personal speciality), you’ll want to take off 
a few layers of clothes, or kick off the bedsheets. And if you're 
too cold you'll shiver, seek warmth and/or go looking for a 
spare jumper. 
During menopause, your upper ‘hot’ threshold level moves 
down and the lower ‘cool’ threshold moves up, so your 
thermostat narrows and becomes rather more sensitive to even 
tiny variations in core temperature. You'll sweat and shiver 
more easily. 
The importance of ovarian hormones in what scientists call 
‘thermoregulation’ went unrecognised for decades because 
researchers wete fat too busy studying fit, sweating men. Except 
for one study in 1940 by physiologist James Hardy, women 
were typically excluded from thermoregulation research.*” 
Hardy believed men had a narrower threshold for sweating 
and shivering than women because in the cold women’s extra 
body fat kept them warm, and ‘in the warm zone long before 
women have started to perspire or even “glow”, the men may 
be covered in beads of sweat’. For many years thereafter it was 
wrongly assumed women had a wider comfort zone because of 
our biology. We also had a lower capacity for exercise (it strained 
our delicate hearts, a reason also given for banning women 
from competing 1n marathons), and for excitement (men were 
the sweaty explorers of jungles and deserts while women stayed 
home, coolly and calmly minding children). 
Our current understanding of thermoregulation indicates 
that sex differences are actually quite tiny when physical fitness 
and body size ate taken into account. Fit and excitable women 
have very well-functioning thermoregulatory systems that 
enable us to cool down when necessary, thank you very much.** 


[PDF page 237]

MENOPAUSE 225 
This is an important point: the fitter you are, the more efficient 
your thermoregulation system. Exercise doesn’t teduce the 
number of hot flashes, but being fit and healthy does make them 
much more bearable. 
Hormones warm us up and cool us down 
If you've ever taken your temperature daily to monitor your 
fertility and estimate ovulation timing, you'll be familiar with 
how your basal body temperature shifts across your cycle. 
Prior to ovulation, oestrogen keeps your body temperature 
low by ptomoting sweating, flushing and loss of body heat. 
Progesterone, which is manufactured by the corpus luteum after 
ovulation, reduces sweating and flushing, so you retain heat and 
warm up. 
Oestrogen tweaks the thermostat settings, which is 
why treating women with oestrogen reduces hot flashes.*”! 
Exactly how diminishing ovarian hormone levels narrow 
the hypothalamic thermostat is a mystery (yes, another gap 
in our neuro-knowledge). We have receptors for oestrogen 
throughout our bodies, so changing levels of oestrogens and 
progesterone may also directly influence the control of skin 
blood flow. But, once again, very little is-known about such 
mechanisms.*» 
One theory involves kisspeptin. Recall in chapter 3, I 
discussed how puberty begins with a ‘kiss’ when KNDy 
neurons in the hypothalamus switch on. The same neurons form 
synapses with warm-sensitive neutrons in the hypothalamus. 
During menopause, KNDy neurons swell up, which changes the 
way watm-sensitive neurons respond to temperature. Lending 
support to this idea, a new drug treatment for hot flashes that 
works by blocking the KNDy-—kisspeptin pathway has recently 
been successfully trialled.** 


[PDF page 238]

226 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Given their regularity and reliability, hot flashes are easily 
studied using fMRI. Women lie on a heating pad in the scanner 
and ate gently toasted until a hot flash 1s inevitably triggered. 
Rather surprisingly, the hypothalamus is not always active 
during a hot flash. This could be due to resolution issues — it 
may not be possible to image the quick-fire activity of only a few 
thousand neurons based on large-scale changes in blood flow. 
Alternatively, all our theories based on human hypothalamic 
thermostats may be wrong!*” 
The brain isn’t silent during hot flashes, and in many women 
the insular and anterior cingulate cortices activate as they 
feel their ‘power surge’. The insular cortex perceives feelings 
and sensations from our bodies that relate to wellbeing, energy, 
mood and temperament. It processes how we /ee/ about what 
we're feeling. Seems rather fitting, wouldn’t you say? 
This is your brain on disrupted sleep 
When I asked the women in my book club what they struggled 
with most during their change of life, almost all responded with 
one word: sleep. I love to sleep. I power nap daily, and usually 
head off to bed around 9 p.m. with a good book. Not a lot 
gets between my pillow and me (just ask my husband), so the 
prospect of disrupted sleep makes me very nervous about the 
decade ahead. 
A search of the literature supports the experiences of my 
book club: forty to sixty per cent of menopausal women report 
problems with sleep, the most common complaint being 
waking up at night for no apparent reason.23° One in three 
petimenopausal women say sleep problems caused them distress 
and impacts their daytime functioning, which pretty much 
qualifies them for a diagnosis of insomnia.2"” 


[PDF page 239]

MENOPAUSE 227 
Curiously, in women but not men sleep is partially regulated 
by sex hormones. So it should come as no surprise sleep 
disruptions strike during times of hormonal transition such as 
puberty, pregnancy and menopause, and during the menstrual 
cycle. One-third of women complain of sleep disturbances and 
related symptoms during their periods because of cramps, heavy 
bleeding, bloating and headaches. 
Problems with sleep may cause brain fog (more on that 
shortly), be caused by hot flashes, and be both the cause and 
consequence of mood disorders. 
A quick guide to the neurobiology of sleep 
Like all creatures, we evolved internal biological clocks that are 
synchronised by the rising and setting of the sun and determine 
daily rhythms including our sleep-wake cycles. Our modern 
technology-driven lives have us ritually underconsuming natural 
light during the day, overconsuming artificial light at night, and 
devaluing the fundamental importance of sleep. We tend to forget 
that we too are earthlings who need to respect sunrise and sunset. 
No aspect of our biology is safe from sleep deprivation. Skip 
one night’s sleep and you feel utterly dreadful. Suffer from 
insomnia, regularly get insufficient sleep, or work the night shift 
and you’te at tisk of depression, metabolic disorders such as 
‘Type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cognitive decline and a 
host of other health problems including increased mortality.”* 
Sleep is under the control of multiple brain systems. Our 
master circadian clock is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
(SCN) of the hypothalamus. The SCN receives input from 
the retina, which sends signals about light and dark from the 
eyes. Like every cell in the body, SCN neurons also contain a 
twenty-four-hour clock that keeps them on track even in the 
absence of light or other environmental cues. The SCN is rich 


[PDF page 240]

228 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
with receptors for oestrogen and forms circuits with other brain 
regions involved in arousal and attention. Other hormones, 
including melatonin, cortisol, thyroid-stimulating hormone and 
prolactin vary across the day and night, and are regulated by our 
circadian rhythms and sleep—wake cycles. 
When we’re asleep we pass through a number of sleep 
stages. We typically cycle from stage one (relaxation) through 
to four deep restorative sleep) and back again to REM (rapid 
eye movement/dreaming) sleep. One ‘sleep cycle’ takes about 
ninety minutes. Typically, we have longer periods of deep sleep 
early in the night, and more periods of REM later in the night. 
Sleep studies use the tools of polysomnography to monitor 
sleep phases via brain waves (electroencephalography — EEG), 
heart rate, breathing, eye movement and leg movement. KEG 
electrodes attach to the scalp, and characteristic KEG patterns 
are associated with each stage. For example, stages three and four 
are marked by ‘slow wave’ or ‘delta wave’ EEG, whereas REM is 
characterised by ‘desynchronous’ or saw-tooth EEG patterns. 
Sex differences in sleep 
Compared to men, women are twice as likely to have trouble 
with sleep.*” Before puberty, girls and boys experience problems 
such as trouble falling asleep at similar rates. During puberty, the 
prevalence of insomnia symptoms increases from 3.4 per cent to 
12.2 per cent in girls (3.6-fold) and from 4.3 per cent to 9.1 per cent 
in boys (2.1-fold). During midlife the sleep issues and insomnia 
tates in women increase dramatically. Doctors remark that they’re 
one of the most common complaints they hear about.“ 
Healthy women and men have different experiences of sleep 
quality. 
For example, women fall asleep faster, spend more time in 
deep sleep, and are less likely to wake up in the middle of the 


[PDF page 241]

MENOPAUSE 229 
night. Women’s ‘sleep efficiency’ — the percentage of time lying 
down that is actually spent asleep — is greater than men’s. 
However, an intriguing paradox exists. 
Despite women objectively experiencing better quality 
sleep than men, women consistently report poorer quality sleep. 
Women ate mote likely than men to say they have trouble falling 
asleep, wake at night, or upon waking feel unrested. There is 
a disconnect between subjective perceptions and objective measures of 
sleep in women.**! 
Hoping to find a more scientifically valid explanation than 
‘women complain more than men’, I called Jessica Mong, 
a neuroendocrinologist and professor of pharmacology at 
the University of Maryland. Mong is a protégée of Margaret 
McCarthy, and during her postdoctoral research she made a 
novel observation linking oestrogen to a gene that controls 
sleep. 
Mong believes that one reason for the apparent friction 
between women’s reported and recorded sleep experiences lies 
in the small sex differences in circadian rhythms. She thinks 
that for some women there might be a conflict between their 
‘biological bedtime’ and their actual bedtime. 
This can best be explained by looking.at the results of a 
2002 study of 2135 Spanish and Italian students aged eighteen 
to thirty. All students filled in the ‘morningness—eveningness 
questionnaire’ (MEQ) to establish if they were an early bird, 
a night owl or somewhere in between. Subjects answered 
questions such as, ‘If you got into bed at 11.00 p.m., how 
tired would you be?’ or ‘Assume that you work a five-hour day 
(including breaks), your job is interesting, and you are paid 
based on yout performance. At what time would you choose 
to begin?’ Average MEQ scores differed significantly between 
men and women. Women felt the need for sleep earlier in the 


[PDF page 242]

230 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
evening than men and woke up earlier. Men preferred to go to 
bed later and wake later. Women reported having an earlier peak 
time for mental performance and time of day for ‘feeling best’. 
(There was, however, a small d-value of 0.28 and a large degree 
of overlap of eighty-nine per cent.) 
As Mong and I discussed, this suggests some (not all) women 
(and some men) may head off to bed later than their ‘natural 
bedtime’ requires and despite getting a ‘good night’s sleep’, are 
operating in a state of mild jetlag. 
Mong suggests mood disorders also contribute to the 
perception of poorer sleep quality — our assessment of 
how well we’ve slept is strongly impacted by anxiety and 
depression. But mood doesn’t fully explain the differences 
between perception and objective measures that exist for 
healthy women and men. 
Another reason Mong gave for the conundrum is similar 
to that discussed for thermoregulation — the majority of sleep 
research has been done on men, and there are significant gaps 
in out knowledge of how biological sex influences our circadian 
rhythms and sleep. Because traditional laboratory recordings of 
sleep quality such as EEG ate based on male physiology, they 
may not be ‘tuned’ to detect sleep quality in women. 
Certainly the discordance between how women say they feel 
versus what sleep study data displays has led to a lack of clarity 
about the true nature of sleep and insomnia in midlife women, 
especially during menopause.** 
How do ovarian hormones influence our experience of 
sleep? Given women’s experiences of sleep at reproductive life 
transitions such as puberty, pregnancy and menopause, our 
current understanding of the relationships between circadian 
thythms, sex hormones and the sleep-wake cycle in women is 
pretty poor. Yet another field of neuroscience in its infancy! 


[PDF page 243]

MENOPAUSE 231 
Which comes first — hormones, 
hot flashes or sleep problems? 
For women going through the change of life, it would seem 
likely that a domino effect of sorts is the cause: hormones cause 
hot flashes and hot flashes cause poor sleep. However, not every 
woman wakes up during a night-time flash, and there is some 
evidence that waking up /riggers the flashing and sweating.*?**4 
Furthermore, while HRT is the most effective treatment for 
those women suffering hot flashes or night sweats, not all 
women find that HRT helps insomnia. 
There are plenty of reasons for developing sleep problems 
at any point in the lifespan. A combination of stress, poor 
lifestyle choices, medical conditions, or plain old bad habits 
such as taking your iPhone to bed to check Facebook impact 
healthy sleep. 
Midlife also brings with it difficulties with work, teenage 
children (perhaps even a child going through puberty), potential 
problems with long-term relationships and ageing parents. We 
know poor sleep affects mood the next day, and in turn feeling 
anxious in turn adversely affects sleep. 
A psychiatrist friend of mine says she often counsels her 
patients that waking up, especially as you get older, 1s perfectly 
normal. Lying there worrying that you're not getting your required 
unbroken eight hours (among other concerns) makes things 
worse. It’s easy to get caught in a vicious cycle of wakefulness and 
wottying, with night sweats and mood disorders giving ample 
time for minds to ruminate in the wee hours. 
Sleep problems often need to be dealt with using an 
armouty of therapeutic and lifestyle tools. We'll discuss 
the role for hormone therapy later in the chapter. Lifestyle 
recommendations include the usual healthy diet and physical 


[PDF page 244]

232 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
exercise recommendations, with particular attention to ‘sleep 
hygiene’ including avoiding stimulants, keeping your bedroom 
dark and cool, and limiting artificial light sources after 
sundown. 
This is your brain on the menopausal blues 
For all women, but especially those with a history of clinical 
mood disorders, the years around the menopause are now 
recognised as a window of vulnerability for depression. Similar 
windows open at other times of intense hormonal instability 
or dramatic shifts in hormone levels such as puberty and 
postpartum. - 
Feeling sad, anxious, irritable or suffering mood swings 
are common symptoms affecting up to one in five women in 
midlife. Depression or anxiety is not necessarily going to develop 
unless you have a long-standing history of mood disorders 
ot PMDD. If they do emerge, symptoms are much the same 
as those discussed previously and include emotional flatness, 
feeling unable to cope, irritability, social isolation, tearfulness, 
decreased energy and failure to enjoy normal activities and 
relationships. 
In chapter 6 we discussed the multitude of bottom-up/ 
biological, outside-in/social and top-down/psychological factors 
that influence the development of depression and anxiety. From 
a bottom-up perspective, it’s thought that oestradiol modulates 
the synthesis, availability and metabolism of serotonin, a key 
neurotransmitter in depression, and dopamine, involved in 
motivation and pleasure. So menopause itself doesn’t cause 
depression but the transition is when bottom-up hormones 
appear to be in the driving seat (or, at the very least, a loud and 
obnoxious back-seat driver). 


[PDF page 245]

MENOPAUSE 233 
Because symptoms may be gradual in onset, or fluctuate 
over the course of a decade or more, some women will not 
recognise symptoms as part of a reversible and treatable 
problem, but rather will interpret them as a permanent change 
in their life. Jayashti Kulkarni says that perimenopausal mood 
disorders are not well recognised and are wrongly treated with 
antidepressants. ‘Women with this type of depression generally 
respond better to hormone treatments. But the link between 
depression and hormones is not often made, she says. Kulkarni 
believes there is a great deal of variation between women in how 
their hormones affect mood. “Some women ate very sensitive 
to small shifts in gonadal hormones; others are not, she says.*” 
The good news 1s menopausal mood swings are not the ‘new 
normal’, they are treatable, and the blues often lift once women 
shift from perimenopause into late post-menopause.**° 
This is your brain on ‘brain fog’ 
I’ve heard clinicians say ‘brain fog’ isn’t a real diagnosis, which 1s 
cortect. “Brain fog’ is a colloquial description of symptoms used 
to describe slow ot hazy thinking, difficulty focusing, confusion, 
lack of concentration and forgetfulness. Unless someone is 
medically or scientifically trained, they’re not going to describe 
their symptoms as ‘similar to mild cognitive impairment’ (which 
is the medical description). 
Regardless of terminology, the menopausal transition is a 
time of increased vulnerability to foggy thoughts and memory 
issues. A meta-analysis published in 2014 confirmed that these 
symptoms ate not imaginary. Compared to young, healthy, 
fertile women, post-menopausal women performed worse on 
247 tasks of verbal memory and fluency.*” Similarly, women who'd 
had their ovaries surgically removed and were plunged into 


[PDF page 246]

234 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
sudden menopause also performed worse on verbal memory 
tests after surgery. 
Professor John Eden, gynaecologist and reproductive 
endocrinologist and director of the Women’s Health and 
Research Institute of Australia, told me that a change in ‘word- 
finding’ ability is a common symptom in the menopausal women 
he treats. He commented that lawyers, in particular, notice this 
symptom early, presumably because they rely so heavily on 
verbal gymnastics and sharp recall. 
Memory lapses and inability to concentrate may be attributed 
to poor-quality sleep and tiredness which become compounded 
by stress, mood disorders and the life circumstances women 
often find themselves experiencing in their late forties and 
fifties. Coping with teenagers, ageing parents with health 
problems, work, and relationship issues can all negatively impact 
cognitive function. Is there evidence linking ‘brain fog’ to 
dwindling ovarian hormones? 
Neurally speaking, oestrogen enables sharp thinking by keeping 
synapses healthy. If you were to view young healthy neurons 
under a high-powered microscope, you'd see their dendrites are 
covered in tiny nubs or spines, like buds on a tree branch. As we 
age we lose spines. Think of a young tree in late spring growing 
new branches, twigs and lush foliage versus the bare branches of 
a tree in winter. We see loss of spines in menopausal monkeys 
and rodents who’ve had their ovaries removed, and spine loss 
is correlated with worse memory. We have no idea if this is also 
the case in menopausal women, but it’s certainly a possibility that 
hormone decline is tesponsible for brain fog because of spine loss. 
When writing this chapter, I had conversations with 
clinicians about the menopausal chicken-and-egg scenario. At 
best they conclude that symptoms ate interlinked. ‘Hot flashes 
and sweats, sleep disturbance, low mood and anxiety, all 


[PDF page 247]

MENOPAUSE 235 
can have a negative impact on higher brain function, said Sonia 
Davison, endocrinologist at Jean Hailes for Women’s Health via 
email. “You can’t dissect out hot flashes and sweats from sleep 
disturbance. We know sleep is really important for consolidation 
of memory. But is brain fog due to disturbed sleep, anxiety, 
ot hormones? We just don’t know, Professor Sue Davis from 
Monash University told me over the phone. 
Is it ‘brain fog’ or dementia? 
One of the fears many women have is whether their foggy brain 
is an early sign of an inevitable decline towards dementia. One 
neuroscientist I know, a dementia researcher in her late forties, 
confessed to me even she’d visited her GP to talk through her 
symptoms for fear she had early onset Alzheimer’s disease (AD). 
Her feats were not unfounded. Menopausal brain fog and early 
stage AD share many of the same symptoms, including those of 
which my friend had a detailed professional understanding. AD 
often begins with lapses in memory and difficulty in finding the 
right words for everyday objects.** 
We'll unpack the various types of memory loss as a part of 
normal ageing, mild cognitive decline and dementia in the next 
chapter. For now it’s important to realise that a certain degree 
of forgetfulness is normal at any stage of life. We all have ‘tip- 
my-the-tongue’ moments, call our children by the wrong name, 
ot can’t remember why we walked into a room. We just tend to 
become more conscious of ‘senior moments’ the older we get. 
So how do you differentiate between the symptoms of 
cognitive decline and menopause? 
‘Clinically, you can’t, answered John Eden when I posed this 
question to him. “Ihe simplest way to find out is to give women 
two months of hormone therapy and see if theit symptoms 
improve.’ 


[PDF page 248]

236 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
What role does hormone therapy play in the improvement 
of brain fog? Similar to our foggy understanding of the role of 
hormones and memory loss, researchers are struggling to come 
up with a clear answer. 
Asa tule, normal memory loss involves forgetting where you 
put your keys, whereas dementia involves forgetting what your 
keys are for. 
Will you ‘suffer’ or ‘sail’ 
~ through menopause? 
Elsewhere in this book, Pve introduced you to people who 
appear to be immune’ or resilient to whatever troubles life 
throws their way. Children who display exceptional resilience 
have been likened to dandelions who grow and thrive in a 
crack in the concrete, in contrast to the more delicate orchids 
who need more careful attention to blossom. In chapter 6 
we met the Dunedin Study ‘seventeen per cent’ who remain 
mentally well into midlife. And in the final chapter of this 
book you'll meet an exceptional group of individuals (three 
out of every four of whom are women) who reach the age of a 
hundred and beyond. 
While many women ‘suffer’ through menopause, I was 
curious about the twenty per cent of women who sail through 
the change without encountering stormy waters. What are 
the traits of these women? Can doctors predict in advance 
who these symptom-free women will be? And what can we 
learn from them? 
Sadly, I was unable to find any literature focusing on what I’d like 
to call ‘menopausal dandelions’; instead, most evidence identifies 
risk factors for developing various menopausal symptoms (with 
the best characterised being insomnia and depression). 


[PDF page 249]

MENOPAUSE 237 
Risk factors for developing insomnia or depression during 
menopause include: 
©) 4@. +0) 20) 7@ 
g 
Low socioeconomic status. 
Being in a minority or marginalised social group. 
Poor overall physical health. 
Experiencing psychosocial stressors. 
Personality traits of higher neuroticism, lower 
agreeableness, lower conscientiousness. 
A history of depression or PMDD. 
Jean Hailes for Women’s Health notes that how you react to 
menopause will depend on factors including: 
? 
+O 
The type of menopause you have — whether it is ‘natural’, 
expected and on time, early, or as a result of surgery or 
chemotherapy. 
Your age. 
Your stage of life and whether you have done the things you 
wanted to, like have children or all the children you wanted 
to have. 
Whether you have achieved the things you wanted to 
achieve — do you have an identity and purpose you are 
happy with? 
How you view your body and feel about the changes that 
ate happening to you. 
Are you as healthy as you can be and taking care of 
yourself??? 
Interestingly, there is evidence for cultural differences in the 
experience of menopause, with different sets of symptoms 
reported in different countries (rather like PMS). Indigenous 


[PDF page 250]

238 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Australian women may view menopause more positively, not so 
much as the end of their reproductive life but the beginning 
of their role as cultural leaders. Women from some Western 
cultures are more likely to view menopause negatively — it’s the 
end of their reproductive years as well as their sexual desirability 
and they experience a sense of grief and loss.” 
Hormone therapy for menopause 
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT), sometimes called 
hormone therapy (HT), is a drug combination of oestrogen 
and/or progesterone, and sometimes testosterone. 
Replacing hormones using HRT 1s the most effective treatment 
available for symptoms related to oestrogen withdrawal during 
menopause, if started when symptoms begin, that is, before the 
age of sixty ot within ten years of menopause.~”*” 
For many women, the decision to use HRT remains a scary 
one. While writing this chapter, most women I spoke to were 
terrified of the risks and unsure about the benefits. 
The choice to use any type of HRT, including the contraceptive 
pill, is not simple because there are complicated risks and benefits 
to weigh up, confusing messages and newspaper reports, and 
even conflicting advice from medical professionals. The decision 
really comes down to deciding: are the risks worth the benefits 
that HRT can deliver? 
Before I discuss these risks and benefits further, it’s worth 
understanding the rather provocative history of HRT. 
A quick history of HRT 
HRT for menopause has been around longer than you might 
suspect — since the late 1800s. As early as the 1930s menopausal 
women were routinely offered extracts of human placenta or 


[PDF page 251]

MENOPAUSE 239 
oestrogen distilled from the-urine of pregnant women in what 
was later described as ‘socialized estrogenicity’, whereby the 
‘estrogen-rich woman gives to the estrogen-poor’.?” 
The drug Premarin, which is made from urine extracted 
from pregnant mares — don’t be too horrified, for years 
insulin for diabetes was extracted from pig’s pancreases — was 
first marketed in the 1940s. Hormone doses in these early 
pteparations were far in excess (in the order of ten times) of 
those prescribed today, and modern doses of HRT contain less 
synthetic hormones than found in some versions of the oral 
contraceptive pill. 
By the mid-1970s it became apparent HRT was not without 
its risks, and studies showed links between oestrogen therapy 
and endometrial cancer. This led to the finding that women 
with a uterus also need progesterone added to the mix to 
prevent endometrial cancer (women without a uterus because of 
hysterectomy don’t need added progesterone). 
In 1972, one of the more lyrical women’s health papers ever 
written appeared in The Journal of the American Geriatrics Soctety, 
penned by New York gynaecologist Robert Wilson and his 
wife, a nutse, Thelma Wilson. It claims the oestrogen molecule 
is by far the most important hormone in the body. “Estrogen 
produces the beauty, the allure which attracts the male. This can 
no more be resisted than the moth can resist the flame. Instead 
of death there results life — that is why we ate here.” 
In the paper, the Wilsons describe menopause as ‘a galloping 
catastrophe’ and a time of ‘slowly foundering sexuality’ treatable 
by the simple transfer of natural oestrogens from one mammal 
to another. They posit that the timely administration of natural 
oestrogens plus progesterone to middle-aged women will 
prevent the climacteric, ‘a syndrome that seems unnecessary for 
most of the women in the civilized world, 


[PDF page 252]

240 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
The Wilsons correctly identify many of HR's positive 
benefits. Oeostrogen ‘will inhibit osteoporosis and thus help to 
prevent fractures, as long as they continue healthful activities 
and appropriate diets. Breasts and genital organs will not 
shrivel.’ Although the final line surely reflects the era in which it 
was published: ‘Such women will be much more pleasant to live 
with and will not become dull and unattractive.” 
The 1970s marked the beginning of the sexual revolution 
and at the same time that younger women were embracing the 
reproductive freedom begotten by the contraceptive pull, older 
women were embracing HRT as an elixir of youth, freeing 
them from hot flashes, sleepless nights and mood swings (and 
becoming dull and unattractive). 
During the 1990s prescriptions for HRT skyrocketed, 
with US statistics citing up to ninety million women were 
taking HRT by 1999.*° While millions embraced HRT, others 
questioned whether naturally dwindling hormone stores should 
be viewed as a problem. They resisted the notion that women of 
a certain age suffered from ‘oestrogen deficiency’ that needed 
restoration in order to function as feminine. They pointed 
towards our Western obsession with youth and beauty as the 
problem, not ageing ovaries. 
Similar debates about HRT can be heard today, but with an 
extra frisson of fear. 
Fear, loathing and women’s health studies 
In the decades since the 1970s, numerous women’s health 
studies have been conducted to learn about the risks and 
benefits of HRT. 
The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) is a randomised 
controlled trial designed to examine the effects of HRT on heart 
attacks, stroke, blood clots, bone fractures, breast, colon and 


[PDF page 253]

MENOPAUSE 241 
uterine cancer, and overall causes of death. Over 27000 healthy 
women aged fifty to seventy-nine were enrolled and randomly 
assigned to recetve HRT or placebo.*”* 
In 1996 the Million Women Study began recruiting one 
million UK women aged fifty to sixty-four into a cohort study 
to reseatch how various reproductive and lifestyle factors, 
including HRT, affect women’s health.” 
Other studies include the Nurses’ Health Study, which has 
followed the health of several hundred thousand US nurses 
to see if there is a relationship between medical and lifestyle 
choices such as the oral contraceptive pill, alcohol use, exercise, 
cigarette smoking, obesity and, of course, HRT. Thanks to the 
nurses, we know that a Mediterranean-style diet reduces the risk 
of colon cancer, and obesity increases the risk of stroke.””° 
The post-menopausal oestrogen/progesterone interventions 
(PEPI) randomised controlled trial ran from 1987 to 1990 and 
studied 800 women aged forty-five to sixty-four to learn about 
the risks and benefits of various HRT regimens. Thanks to 
PEPI we know HRT increases breast density on a mammogram, 
which makes it harder to detect breast cancers if they do occur.” 
The Study of Women’s Health Actoss the Nation (SWAN) is 
an observational study that has followed over 3000 American 
women from perimenopause through their transition. SWAN 
is significant because it has taken into account women’s ethnic 
backgrounds, and found that ethnicity plays a big part in the 
menopausal transition experience.” 
In July 2017, the North American Menopause Society 
(NAMS) teleased a position statement that came about after 
society members reviewed decades of data amassed from 
millions of women to see the effects of HRT. The extraordinary 
list of women’s health issues considered included cancers, heart 
disease, diabetes, mood, osteoporosis and fracture prevention, 


[PDF page 254]

242 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
hot flashes, musculoskeletal and joints, and on and on. NAMS 
concluded that the benefits of HRT outweigh the risks for 
healthy women with menopausal symptoms.” 
There are many other studies I could mention but I don’t 
want to bore you; instead, I want you to appreciate that HRT is 
actually a well-researched and scrutinised women’s health issue. 
We have very detailed information about the risks and benefits 
for a wide range of health outcomes. 
Why, despite the wealth of knowledge we have available, is 
there still so much fear and confusion around HRT? 
It all comes down to the WHI and the dramatic events that 
unfolded in 2002 and 2003. I was working at a national breast 
cancet orgafiisation at the time when news filtered in that 
stunned us all. WHI announced it had stopped the oestrogen 
plus progestin arm of the trial because of safety issues. It 
appeared that combined HRT caused a small increased risk of 
breast cancer, heart disease, stroke and blood clots. 
While researchers and statisticians immediately pointed out 
that the risks were greatly exaggerated and there were errors 
in the original paper, media attention was understandably 
extraordinary. Women on the trial were sent letters telling them 
to stop, and doctors were inundated with calls from frantic 
patients. Many doctors advised their patients to come off HRT, 
and it has been estimated that globally fifty to eighty per cent of 
women stopped HRT. 
In 2003 it was reported combined HRT increased the risk of 
dementia in postmenopausal women aged sixty-five years and 
older.” The Million Women Study followed with a 2003 report 
in the Lancet claiming use of HRT increased the incidence of 
breast cancer.’ I remember the CEO of my organisation 
spending days fielding calls and media interviews from what 
can only be described as her ‘HRT war room’ 


[PDF page 255]

MENOPAUSE 243 
In the fifteen years since the alarm bell rang, studies 
have continued to gather and analyse data, and our current 
understanding of the risks and benefits is far more nuanced. 
The major problem with the WHI study was that the average 
age of women entering the trial was sixty-three; only ten per 
cent of women were younger than fifty-five when they began 
treatment. We now understand that the effects of HRI’ vary 
depending on the age at which it’s given. Most women in the 
WHI were simply too old to be starting HRT safely. 
We've since learned that there 1s a critical window for starting 
HRT — the window closes within a few years of a woman’s last 
period. HRT can be taken safely, but only if treatment starts 
within the critical window when women ate young; ideally, when 
symptoms first appear. If older women start treatment decades 
after their menopause, the risks of HRT do indeed outweigh the 
benefits.”! : 
In other words, timing is everything. 
Research has also shown there is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ 
approach to HRT. Instead, decisions about the type, dose, 
formulation, route of administration and duration of use should 
be based on the unique health risks of each woman, her age 
ot time from menopause, and her goals for. therapy. The old 
blanket advice, ‘take the lowest dose for the shortest period of 
time’, has been dropped. 
Weighing up the risks and benefits of HRT 
A generation of women have missed out on HRT because of 
feat about developing breast cancer, blood clots or heart disease. 
Of course, no therapy is without risk, but for perspective let’s 
put your tisk of developing breast cancer into context. Within a 
given year,” 


[PDF page 256]

244 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Q if you are taking HRT, you have a 4 in 1000 chance of 
breast cancer; 
Q if you are vot taking HRT, you have a 3 in 1000 chance of 
breast cancer. 
Another way to look at it: having more than two standard 
alcoholic drinks per day or being overweight puts you at a higher 
risk of developing breast cancer than taking HRT. 
You might also find it comforting to know we’re getting very 
good at detecting and treating breast cancer if it does occur. 
In Australia, ninety per cent of women diagnosed with breast 
cancer ate alive five years later, and if the cancer is limited 
to the breast, ninety-six per cent will be alive five years after 
diagnosis.*°! 
The risk of having a heart attack related to use of hormone 
therapy appears to depend on your age.*” There is no increased 
risk of heart attacks related to HRT in women who: 
Q start taking HRT less than ten years after their last period, 
or 
Q were aged fifty to fifty-nine years when they started HRT. 
What about the benefits of HRT? 
Hot flashes. HRT is, hands down, the best evidence-based 
treatment to treat hot flashes. 
Insomnia. If your sleep disturbances are due to night 
sweats and/or hot flashes, HRT improves sleep. In women with 
sleep problems without hot flashes, HRT doesn’t always make 
a difference.*® John Eden suggests this may be because many 
women often delay treatment for sleep issues for some yeats. 
Thus, even once hot flashes are controlled, insomnia has been 
established. 


[PDF page 257]

MENOPAUSE 245 
Mood disorders. If anxiety and depression are tied up with 
disrupted sleep patterns due to hot flashes, HRT is likely to 
help. And as John Eden said to me, all you can do is trial HRT 
for a few months and see if it improves your mood. If anxiety 
ot depression ate the dominant symptoms without hot flashes, 
then doctors typically recommend a range of treatments such as 
those outlined in chapter 6.7% 
Brain fog. Once again, if hot flashes wake you up at night, 
brain fog may clear with HRT. However, the evidence remains 
inconclusive at best. Some trials of HRT and verbal memory 
show a benefit, others show no benefit. 
Interestingly, a small pilot trial of nine women conducted 
by Professor Sue Davis suggests that testosterone (usually 
given to treat low libido) improves verbal learning and 
memory in post-menopausal women. ‘Much of the research 
on testosterone in women to date has focused on sexual 
function, Davis has said, “but testosterone has widespread 
effects in women, including, it appears, significant favourable 
effects on verbal learning and memory. Professor Davis 
doesn’t recommend that women experiencing brain fog visit 
their doctor to ask for a script for testosterone because much 
larget randomised, placebo-controlled trials are necessary. 
As we'll learn in chapter 10, keeping your brain healthy and 
yout thinking clear also requires attention to good nutrition, 
physical exercise, adequate sleep, stress reduction and mental 
stimulation.*” 
Sexual dysfunction (including symptoms such as vaginal 
dryness) and muscle aches and pains may also improve with 
HRT. 
As John Eden told me, there is no other health condition he 
knows of where symptoms ate simply endured when there ts a 
safe, cheap, effective treatment on hand. ‘I see women giving 


[PDF page 258]

246 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
up work because of their menopause,’ he said, “but most of my 
cancer patients carry on working through their treatments.’ 
The benefits can perhaps be summarised best by a friend of 
mine who said, ‘It made me feel like me again.’ For this woman 
it wasn’t a question of chasing eternal youth, rather, making the 
informed decision to face the next few decades of her life with 
mental and physical vigour. 
There are various additional risks and benefits that must be 
weighed up for each woman, for example, a history of breast 
cancer, gene mutations predisposing them to breast cancer, early 
menopause or surgical menopause, cardiovascular disease risk 
factors and so on. There are also plenty of complexities around 
the combinations of hormones (oestrogen and/or progesterone 
and/or testosterone), and how you take them (pill, gel, patch, 
vaginal pessary, micronised, bio-identical, lozenge, etc). Such 
considerations ate well outside the scope of this book, and as 
the saying goes, please consult a good women’s health doctor 
(not a sales rep for an online store!). Here in Australia, the 
Jean Hailes organisation is my go-to resource for up-to-date, 
evidence-based, simple information written for a non-medical- 
professional audience. 
Let’s hope this information will allow conversations between 
women and their health-care providers about initiating, 
continuing or stopping HRT to be ‘evidence-based, and not 
fear-based’.”*! 
Does HRT cause or prevent dementia? 
The evidence is very cleat that HRT does not cause dementia 
ot AD. The most recent large trial of 27347 women who were 
followed for eighteen years found deaths from AD and other 
forms of dementia were significantly /ower with oestrogen-alone 
medication than with a placebo.” 


[PDF page 259]

MENOPAUSE 247 
The fear that HRT caused dementia arose ftom the results 
of the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS), 
which was a sub-group of WHI. For the 4532 women included 
in the trial, HRT worsened cognitive function, and increased 
the risk for AD. Despite this trial being of ‘gold standard’ (it was 
randomised, double-blind and controlled) there was the same 
glaring problem with the protocol: women were enrolled at 
the average age of seventy-two, roughly fifteen to twenty years 
after theit menopause, and well beyond the critical window of 
opportunity in which HRT is of benefit. Unfortunately, WHIMS 
came to the zacorrect conclusion that HRT was detrimental to 
brain health and caused AD. We now understand that HRT 
increases dementia risk only if it is begun after the critical period 
has closed.” 
A much smaller study of 428 women has explored the effects 
of HRT timing on brain health.*°’ Women who started HRT 
during perimenopause scored better on the Mini-Mental State 
Examination — a test of cognition and attention — compared 
to women who started HRT after menopause. And women 
who started HRT ‘late’ scored worse on the test than women 
who never used hormone therapy. 
The critical window hypothesis is supported by careful studies 
of the effects of hormone therapy on female rodents. In rats, the 
perimenopause ts a window of opportunity for oestrogen therapy to 
protect the brain against declines in cognitive function and related 
neutodegenerative diseases. When oestrogen is administered to 
middle-aged rats during perimenopause, it improves memory and 
protects against dementia. When oestrogen is administered to 
elderly post-menopausal rats after a prolonged period of hormone 
deprivation, oestrogen loses its neuro-protective power. Some 
researchers propose that the menopausal transition is an additional 
‘critical period of brain plasticity’, similar to infancy, adolescence 


[PDF page 260]

248 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
and pregnancy, one in which the anti-ageing effects of oestrogen 
can be harnessed to promote healthy brain ageing in the decades 
that follow.** 
In short, HRT may prove to be protective against unhealthy 
brain ageing if started when menopausal symptoms emerge, 
and damaging for brain health if started years after menopause. 
But just to be clear, there is no expert consensus on the use of 
HRT to prevent unhealthy brain ageing or forms of dementia. 
We know HRT does no harm, but as yet no trials in which 
HRT has been administered within the critical window have 
been running long enough to conclude whether or not there 1s a 
benefit. Watch this space. 
- 
Mind the gap of midlife 
Carl Jung wrote, “The afternoon of human life must also have a 
significance of its own and cannot merely be a pitiful appendage 
to life’s morning.” 
Apart from menopause, we tend to think of midlife as a 
quiescent period that lies between the turmoil of adolescence 
and the decline of old age. Yet midlife is when we’re at the peak 
of parenting, decision-making, self-confidence, self-esteem, and 
our capacity to earn and contribute to the community. Midlife 
is also when the early warning signs for poor brain and physical 
health emerge, but when there 1s still time to delay, minimise or 
even prevent some of the changes 1n the biological, psychological 
and social functioning that typically occur in later life. 
Midlife is a unique window of opportunity in which to invest 
in future-proofing your brain. It’s time to stop, take stock and 
invest in a healthy future. In the words of John F Kennedy, “The 
time to repair the roof is when the sun is shining.’ 


[PDF page 261]

The Ageing Brain 
WHEN DOES OLD AGE BEGIN? 
We can’t seem to make up our minds, and the older we get, 
the further we move the goalposts marking the last season of 
our lives. 
A 2009 survey of Americans asked participants when they 
believed someone gtew ‘old’. Young folks in their twenties 
believed old age began at sixty. Those under fifty put the threshold 
closer to seventy, whereas those sixty-five and above said that the 
avetage person does not become old until turning seventy-four.*” 
Getting old isn’t nearly as bad as people think it will be. Nor 
is it quite as good. 
On the downside, one in four adults aged sixty-five surveyed 
reported memory loss. One in five had serious illness, were no 
longer sexually active, ot often felt sad or depressed, lonely or 
had trouble paying bills. One in ten felt like a burden. 
On the upside, the same group said they had more time for 
hobbies, travel and volunteer work, and more financial security. 
Of all the good things about getting old, the best by far, 
accotding to older adults, was being able to spend more time 
with family members. 
249 


[PDF page 262]

250 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
One of my boys said to me recently he couldn’t imagine me 
as a little girl and asked how it felt to finally be ‘old’. I told him I 
feel the same now as I did when I was ten. ‘Am I old? Certainly 
not!’ was the answer survey respondents gave too. In fact, the 
older they got, the younger they said they felt. About half of 
those under thirty said they felt their age. But those who were 
seventy-five and older? Just thirty-five per cent say they felt ‘old’. 
The survey results show that as we age we remain on intimate 
terms with our much younger selves. Similarly, we enter the end 
of our lifespan with our past woven intimately into our biology. 
From birth, our neural architecture 1s shaped by life’s ups and 
downs, the decisions we make, the places where we live, work 
and learn, the meaning we’ve derived, and who we love, give life 
to, and travel with through time. How we spend our early years 
will determine how we age. 
More and more of us are living into old age, and there 
has never been a better time in which to do so. Our large, 
clever human brains have bestowed us with modern medicine 
and tools with which we manage our reproductive health, 
avoid maternal and neonatal death, vaccinate against disease, 
prevent pain, treat infection and some cancers, and perform 
surgery if required. One hundred years ago, women lived 
barely long enough to see out their fifties. A baby girl born 
today can expect to live to see out the first decades of the 
twenty-second century. 
We've living longer, but how do our ageing brains fare? 
Dementia, memory loss and cognitive decline are robustly 
related to old age, and AD is one of the leading causes of death 
globally. So, is the payoff for a longer life memory loss and poor 
brain health in our final years? 
To answer this question, I’ve looked to two sources: those 
exceptionally old folks who remain in robust physical and mental 


[PDF page 263]

THE AGEING BRAIN 251 
health until the very end of their lives, and our evolutionary 
past. 
Over millennia, Mother Nature equipped us to survive 
and thrive in the wild. Our brains evolved such that from the 
womb to the tomb we’re required to move, eat well, sleep, 
immerse ourselves in nature, avoid stress, love and befriend, 
and seek meaning. These bottom-up, outside-in and top-down 
requirements neatly match the everyday life prescriptions 
followed by the world’s longest-living people. 
Prevention is our best defence and the research on dementia 
is clear. Those of us who lead mentally, socially and physically 
stimulating lives have reduced risk of age-related brain disease. 
If we live as close as possible to how Mother Nature intended, 
while reaping the rewards of our modern health care, there is 
evety chance we can add not only years to our lives, but life to 
our yeats. | 
Uncovering the secrets of 
exceptional longevity 
On 21 February 1875, one year before Alexander Graham Bell 
filed his patent for the telephone, a baby girl, Jeanne Louise 
Calment, was born in Arles, France. She was alive to witness 
the invention of the aeroplane and the cinema; on a trip to Paris 
she saw the Eiffel Tower being built and she reported she met 
Vincent Van Gogh. In 1997, the same year Diana, Princess of 
Wales died, Calment finally passed away. She was 122 years and 
164 days old. Although blind, almost deaf and confined to a 
wheelchair, Calment reportedly remained spirited and “alert as 
a hummingbird’ till the end. The French called her /a doyenne de 
/’bumanité (the elder of humankind) and she still holds the record 
for the world’s longest-ever living human.*” 


[PDF page 264]

252 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
In April 2017, Emma Martina Luigia Morano of Vercelli, 
Italy, died aged 117. Born in November 1899, Morano was the 
last known living person who was born in the 1800s. According 
to the Guinness Book of Records, Morano followed the same 
extraordinary diet for around ninety years: three eggs per day 
(two raw, one cooked), fresh Italian pasta and a dish of raw meat. 
The current longevity crown belongs to Japanese centenarian 
Nabi Tajima, who was born in August 1900 on Kikatjima, a 
remote island off the southern coast of Japan. 
Once rare as diamonds, the oldest of the old are the fastest- 
growing sector of our global population. If you were born in 
1900 the odds of living till age 100 were less than one in a 
million, and few people lived long enough to see out the 1950s. 
For girls born into wealthy countries today, the odds of blowing 
out 100 candles on a cake are roughly one in fifty. 
When asked her secret to old age, Jeanne Calment attributed 
her longevity to immunity to stress and a good attitude. “I wasn’t 
afraid of anything. I was often reproached for that, she said. 
‘T took pleasure when I could, I acted clearly and morally and 
without regret. I’m very lucky.’ Calment reportedly ate more than 
two pounds of chocolate a week, treated her skin with olive oil, 
rode a bicycle until she was 100, and only quit smoking when 
she was 117 because she became too proud to ask someone else 
to light her cigarettes. Known for her wit, she is widely reported 
as saying, ‘I’ve never had but one wrinkle, and I’m sitting on it. 
Hard work, raw eggs, biking and no regrets. We clamour 
to learn their secrets, and typically the oldest of the old love to 
share their long-won wisdom. ‘I wait. For death and journalists,’ 
Calment once quipped. 
Centenarians certainly provide us with a unique 
opportunity to uncover the secrets of longevity. And for one 
gtoup of researchers in Sydney, Australia, exceptionally old 


[PDF page 265]

THE AGEING BRAIN 253 
folk are providing an insight into successful healthy brain 
ageing. Charlene Levitan and colleagues at the University of 
New South Wales (UNSW) Centre for Health Brain Ageing 
(CHeBA) run the Sydney Centenarian Study, a project that 
includes over 400 residents from the suburbs of Sydney who 
are aged over ninety-five. 
‘Modern medicine has enabled us to add years to our life, 
but I think it’s really important to also add life to our years, 
said Levitan to me on the phone. ‘Because of this, I’m trying to 
uncover, through the world of neuroscience and medicine, the 
keys to successful ageing, so we can all live longer and healthier 
lives. I’m passionate about recognising the value of the oldest 
people in our society, the wisdom that we can learn from them 
that can enrich our society as a whole.’ 
Centenarians are recruited to the study from Sydney suburbs, 
chosen to be representative of the Australian population as a 
whole. ‘We have people who are severely demented and people 
who ate extremely high functioning, says Levitan. “One of our 
aims is to try to be inclusive and cover the full continuum of 
mental and physical function.’ Once their age is verified and 
cross-checked with official records, all participants have their 
mental, physical, cognitive and social health assessed and, 
if they’te able, they undergo an MRI and blood tests. Finally, 
they’re invited to enrol in the Sydney Brain Bank donation 
program. ‘During the thitd phase of assessment we conduct an 
autobiographical interview. The interview adds richness to the 
study, and I just love the stories and the connection, the time 
and the patience they show,’ says Levitan. 
In another longevity project, National Geographic writer Dan 
Buettner famously identified five ‘Blue Zones’ around the globe 
where the residents live to exceptional old age. Despite being 
from very different parts of the world, there ate commonalities 


[PDF page 266]

254 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
to the residents’ lifestyles. “heir longevity has nothing to do 
with brute discipline, diets, exercise programs or supplements,’ 
says Buettner. He believes the longevity of Blue Zones residents 
is a result of living in the right environment that constantly 
‘nudges’ residents into living healthy lifestyles.*”” 
Residents of the Nicoya Peninsula in Costa Rica prioritise 
friendship and family, and they almost never work extra hours if 
it means they have to forgo a good party. They also foster plan de 
vida ot a reason to live. 
In Loma Linda, California, the strong sense of purpose, 
day of rest, no-smoking policy and healthy diet practices of the 
local Seventh Day Adventist community have rubbed off on the 
health of the whole town. 
Residents of the mountainous villages of Sardinia, Italy 
and the Greek island of Ikaria, nap, fast, grow their own food 
and drink wine daily with friends. It’s thought the clean air, 
warm breezes and rugged terrain of the Mediterranean islands 
draw locals outdoors to move naturally. 
The residents of the Japanese islands of Okinawa, home 
to the world’s longest-living women, ate dedicated to family. 
Okinawans practise Hara hachi bu, a reminder to stop eating 
when they’te eighty per cent full; ckzga?, which roughly translates 
to “Why I wake up in the morning’, and form moais, groups of 
five friends who remain committed to each other for life. 
Buettner has distilled the lifestyle practices of Blue Zones 
into lessons for longevity. As he says, to make it to 100 you may 
have to ‘win the genetic lottery’, but the average person’s life 
expectancy can be incteased by moving, prioritising friends, 
family and social gatherings, eating less, drinking wine and 
fostering a sense of purpose. 
Due to the rarity of extremely old folks, the Sydney 
Centenarian Study has partnered with a consortium of 


[PDF page 267]

THE AGEING BRAIN 255 
centenatian research teams from around the globe to pool their 
resources and data to enable more powerful conclusions to be 
drawn. Their data supports the Blue Zones observations. 
‘What is emerging from the global research is that around 
thirty per cent of longevity is contributed by genetics,’ said 
Levitan. “he remaining seventy per cent is to do with our 
lifestyle, which includes a healthy diet, exercise and remaining 
socially integrated.’ One of the strongest themes to emerge is 
related to the personality traits of resilience, adaptability and 
optimism. ‘Most of our centenarians will report optimism as a 
life-long personality characteristic, said Levitan. 
Are the exceptionally old also 
exceptionally happy and healthy’? 
My mother often says to me there’s no way she’d want to live to 
100. And she may have:a point. It’s all well and good following 
longevity principles in an attempt to add years to yout life, but 
what about the life during those years? 
‘There is certainly a myth out there that the older you get, 
the sicker you become, says Levitan, who has found that 
centenarians usually remain in remarkably good health until 
extreme old age, with illness compressed into the very end of 
life. Similarly, Blue Zones residents are unique not only because 
of their extended lifespan but their long years lived free of 
disease and disability — what’s known as a long ‘health-span’. 
A British Journal of Psychiatry report of Jeanne Louise Calment’s 
health at age 118 is another example. “The subject’s performance 
on tests of verbal memory and language fluency 1s comparable 
to that of persons with the same level of education in their 
eighties and nineties. Frontal lobe functions are relatively 
spared and there is no evidence of depressive symptomatology 
or other functional illness” writes Karen Ritchie, a neurologist 


[PDF page 268]

256 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
who examined Calment. Ritchie points out that “at may be 
unreasonable to generalise from a single case study’, and Calment 
may be a ‘statistical outlier’; however, Calment is actually the 
norm.’” As a group, centenarians have a remarkable ability to 
sidestep the usual diseases and maladies of old age. 
Levitan explained to me that researchers have now identified 
three broad groups of centenarians: Escapers, Delayers and 
Survivors, so named because of the routes they’ve taken to avoid 
the major age-related diseases that kill off their peers. 
‘Escapers are those very lucky people who have managed to 
escape illness altogether, and are living till 100 with remarkably 
strong mental and physical capabilities, said Levitan. “Then 
there are the Delayers, who tend to delay any age-related illness 
until their late eighties. Finally, the Survivors are those people 
who have been diagnosed with an age-related disease such 
as cancer, stroke, heart attack, diabetes, and so on. And yet, 
remarkably, they’ve survived.’ 
Another longevity project, the New England Centenarian 
Study (NECS) found that for every five centenarians, one was 
an Escaper, two were Survivors and two were Delayers. Even 
though men were far less likely to reach 100, they were twice 
as likely to be Escapers than women. Men and women were 
equally likely to be Survivors or Delayers. 
Male centenarians appear to be healthier than their female 
counterparts. Regardless of their age, men experience a swifter 
decline to death, with their poor health compressed into a very 
short space of time. For women, the trajectory from good health 
to death is often slower and filled with more doctors’ visits and 
frailty.?” 
In one sense, the extremely old become orphans of time. 
Extreme old age brings a thinned social landscape with the 
death of life partners and friends.* This picture sounds 


[PDF page 269]

THE AGEING BRAIN 257 
depressing and lonely, yet there is a paradox: the older you get, 
the happier you ate. 
Compared to middle age, extremely old folks’ emotional 
wellbeing, happiness and optimism is, on average, higher. In a 
paper titled “he Emotion Paradox in the Aging Brain’, Mara 
Mather, a gerontologist at UC Davis explains that older adults 
ate less physically and emotionally reactive to stress than 
younger adults. ‘When older adults experience interpersonal 
tensions, they engage less in destructive conflict strategies, 
such as yelling, arguing or name calling, and generally find 
tense interpersonal situations less stressful than younger 
adults do, writes Mather. Healthy older adults’ ability to 
roll with the punches is likely due to a number of factors, 
including wisdom, judgement, experience and age-related 
changes in the brain.*” 
Predicting who will reach 100 
Can we predict in advance who will receive a telegram from the 
Queen? Are centenarians grown-up versions of the exceptionally 
resilient dandelion children we met in earlier chaptersr 
I put these questions to Professor Richie Poulton, head of 
the Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study. 
Remember, the Dunedin Study has closely charted every detail 
of the lives of over 1000 people born in the mid-1970s. The 
cohort is now entering middle age, and Poulton believes he 
already has a fair idea who will be blowing out 100 candles on 
their cake. ‘It is quite obviously evident,’ he says. 
Poulton and his team have measuted the pace of biological 
ageing in his 1000-strong cohort. Biological ageing is 
estimated by charting the ‘coordinated decline in the integrity 
of multiple organ systems’, including eighteen biomarkers of 
catdiovasculat, metabolic, endocrine, lung, liver, kidney, 


[PDF page 270]

258 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
immune and dental health. Across twelve years, the biomarkers 
were measured at three time points when the cohort members 
were aged twenty-six, thirty-two and thirty-eight. Despite 
being in their forties and still being too young to have age- 
related disease, clear patterns emerged. “From ages twenty- 
six to thirty-eight we see increasing differentiation between 
groups in terms of their physical health and mental health, 
Poulton says. Based on their pace of ageing scores, three 
groups were identified: an average group who experienced 
one yeat of physiological decline per calendar year; a fast- 
ageing group who experienced more than twice this rate 
of change, and a slow-ageing group who experienced almost 
no change at all. 
Poulton’s team then chose six personal-history characteristics 
already linked to poor health and mortality: familial longevity, 
childhood social class, adverse childhood experiences, childhood 
health, intelligence and self-control. As he writes in a 2017 report 
in Aging Cell, ‘Study members with shorter-lived grandparents, 
who grew up in lower social class homes, who experienced more 
adverse childhood events, who had poorer childhood health, 
who scored lower on IQ tests, and who had poorer self-control 
all showed evidence of accelerated biological ageing during their 
twenties and thirties.’ 
‘The fast-ageing group is going to enter the second half of 
their life in bad shape and get worse, predicts Poulton. ‘We 
need to start looking at ageing younger than you might think, 
because therapies will need to be delivered by midlife in order 
to make a difference.’ He tells me the great sadness of his life 
is knowing he won’t live long enough to see if his predictions 
come true. ‘I'll be pushing up daisies by then, he says.?” 
Of course, not all centenarians or slow-agers are alike and 
personal histories are unique. The NECS team has found 


[PDF page 271]

THE AGEING BRAIN 259 
their cohort varied widely in years of education (no years to 
postgraduate), socioeconomic status (very poor to very rich), 
teligion, ethnicity, and patterns of diet (strictly vegetarian to 
extremely rich in saturated fats). 
However, centenarians in Sydney, New England and 
Okinawa do share a few key characteristics: 
Q They’te nearly always lean. 
Q They rately smoke (Calment was an exception). 
Q They’te better able to buffer stress than most people. 
2 Women have a history of bearing children after the age of 
thirty-five or even forty years. 
Q They score low on personality traits of neuroticism, and 
high on optimism and purpose. 
Exceptional longevity clearly runs in families — the children and 
siblings of centenarians are healthier, have a more favourable 
‘biological signature’, and they age slower. Tellingly, Jeanne 
Calment’s brother Francois lived till the age of ninety-seven, but 
as she put it: ‘God didn’t want there to be two hundred-year- 
olds in the same family, so it fell to me.*” 
Does this mean that extreme longevity is genetic? 
‘Not at all, say members of the Okinawan Centenarian 
Study team, also part of the global consortium. “We believe 
the Okinawans have both genetic and non-genetic longevity 
advantages — the best combination — the dietary habits, the 
physical activity, the psychological and social aspects, all play an 
important role in Okinawan longevity.*” 
It turns out that we all have the genetic capability to live to 
at least our eighties. As the NECS team explains, this makes 
sense in the context of the study of Seventh Day Adventists in 
Loma Linda who live eight to ten years longer than the average 


[PDF page 272]

260 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
American in neighbouring towns. As a group, they tend to 
be physically fit, vegetarian non-smokers who spend a lot of 
time with their families and with their church group. Plenty 
of Americans make nearly the opposite health choices and as 
a consequence die younger. ‘What the Seventh Day Adventist 
results also show us is that the average American has the genes 
to reach their mid late eighties, they just need to take very 
good cate of themselves with proper lifestyle choices,’ says the 
NEGCS teamier: 
Why do women live longer than men? 
All over the world, women live longer than men. In Australia 
in 2016, the median age at death was 85.0 years for women and 
78.9 years for men. The gender gap grows with age: among 
centenarians worldwide, women outnumber men nine to one. 
The female advantage is not restricted to humans, as for other 
species, from honeybees to orca whales to rodents, females 
outlive males.78° 7°! 
The size of the gender gap in longevity has always ebbed and 
flowed. Mortality before modernity was influenced by wars, 
infection and death during childbirth. In nineteenth century 
Europe, life expectancy was less than forty years and longevity 
of men and women was generally very similar. High female 
mortality due to pregnancy and childbirth corresponded to a 
high male mortality from causes related to work, accidental 
injury or wat (both sexes succumbed to infection and disease 
in equal numbers). The greatest gap was seen during the middle 
decades of the twentieth century. For example, in the UK in 
the 1970s the average life expectancy for men was about seven 
years less than for women. The men who died before their 
time in the 1970s grew up in the early decades of the twentieth 


[PDF page 273]

THE AGEING BRAIN 261 
centuty, when most young men smoked and drank, went to 
wart and worked in physically stressful jobs. Such men became 
the ‘carriers’ of excess mortality determined by their misspent 
youth. 
Nowadays, teenagers and young men are three times more 
likely than young women to die by accidents (usually in a car), 
suicide, drowning and violence. These tates ensure that by 
age twenty-five more women are alive than men. In middle age 
men are still more likely to die in car accidents or from suicide, 
but illnesses related to smoking, alcohol and poor diet start to 
emerge, with death from heart disease being the main cause 
of the gender gap. For men, the risk of heart disease begins in 
their forties. For women, it doesn’t start to increase until after 
menopause. By late life, men are more likely than women to die 
from heart disease, cancer and diabetes. Of course, women are 
not immortal, and we lead the statistics in death from dementia, 
chronic lower respiratory (lung) disease, cerebrovascular disease, 
influenza and pneumonia.** 
The past few decades have seen the gap close. Harvard 
scientist ‘Thomas Perls, who heads up NECS and the Long 
Life Family Study (LLFS), suggests it’s primarily the reduction 
in male mortality, as opposed to an increase in female mortality, 
that is closing the gap. He adds, ‘In general, the higher a nation’s 
level of social and economic development, the greater the 
life expectancy for both men and women and the greater 
the convergence in the two figures.’ 
The life experiences and circumstances of women who are 
now in their eighties and nineties were very different from those 
of their daughters and granddaughters. Hach generation ‘carries’ 
their lifestyle load of risk forward. 
Only time will tell if girls and boys born today reach ‘equality’ 
in mortality. 


[PDF page 274]

262 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
The influence of biological sex on the lifespan 
The secret to longevity is actually quite simple: avoid dying 
young! Do women live longer because we pay closer attention 
to Blue Zones lifestyle advice or because we make more visits to 
the doctor, thereby avoiding early deathr 
Probably not. As mentioned, elderly women often spend 
their extra few years of life in poor health, and female non- 
human species generally outlive their male counterparts, so it’s 
doubtful whether we can attribute healthy lifestyle practices to 
the gender gap. 
Clearly, men and women differ genetically, and one theory 
posits that the female ‘backup’ X chromosome provides 
a sutvival advantage. Men, in contrast, have only one X 
chromosome, so they cannot rely on a backup if a gene on the 
X chromosome is defective. 
Another theory implicates mitochondria, which exist in 
almost all animal cells and convert our food into the energy 
that powers the body. Genetic variation in mitochondria reliably 
predicts life expectancy in males, but not in females. We receive 
copies of genes from both parents, except for mitochondrial 
genes that come only from our mother. It’s possible natural 
selection, which is evolution’s ‘quality control process’, only 
screens the quality of mitochondrial genes in females, so the 
mutations related to ageing are carried by males.*** 
Finally, longevity in women might be advantageous for a 
rather warm and fuzzy reason: grandmothers! Earlier in the 
book we saw that menopausal orcas contribute to the survival 
of young whales by guiding the pod to hunting grounds, 
and a similar theory proposes that human matriarchs confer 
the same survival benefits through the practice known as 
‘alloparenting’. 


[PDF page 275]

THE AGEING BRAIN 263 
The cute but contentious ‘grandmother hypothesis’ was first 
ptoposed in the 1980s, when anthropologist Kristen Hawkes 
spent time with the Hadza hunter—gather communities in 
Tanzania. She noticed that when grandmothers wete involved 
in supporting their daughters by babysitting and gathering 
food, the grandchildren and the entite tribe were healthier 
and lived longer. Hawkes took this idea one step further and 
claimed that grandmothers provide the foundation for human 
social connection, pair bonding and evolution of bigger brains. 
Hawkes has since watered down her original hypothesis based 
on mathematical modelling of human populations, but still 
claims, “Grandmothers make us human’. 
The influence of reproductive history on the lifespan 
Your reproductive history includes the length of time from your 
menatche to menopause, number of pregnancies, your age at 
your first and last pregnancies, and duration of breastfeeding. 
This history reflects your cumulative exposure to sex hormones, 
and your ‘exposure’ to parenting, which coalesce to influence 
both lifespan and health-span in some surprising ways. 
For example, the older you are when you give birth to your 
/ast child, the longer you'll live, a phenomenon first noticed in 
centenarian women —a remarkable number of whom gave birth 
to babies late in life. According to the LLFS, women who give 
birth to a child aftr the age of forty have four times greater 
odds of reaching 100 compared to women who have their 
last child before the age of forty. And women who have 
their last child after the age of thirty-three years have twice 
the odds of exceptional longevity compared to women who 
have their last child before age twenty-nine.” 
The age at which you give birth to your first baby matters 
too. Time and time again, studies have found that women who 


[PDF page 276]

264 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
give birth in their teens experience worse health as they age, and 
they die younger than women who delay their first pregnancy. 
Sadly, socioeconomic status contributes to this statistic. Teenage 
mothers ate more likely to have grown up in disadvantaged 
households than women who delay their first pregnancy, and 
by vittue of raising a child from a young age, they’re less likely 
to stay in education and more likely to continue the cycle of 
disadvantage.*** 
Over the years, there have been conflicting reports on 
whether the nwmber of children you have influences lifespan. 
It turns out that the relationship between motherhood and 
mortality follows a J-shaped curve. If, like me, you're partial 
to a glass of red wine, you may be familiar with the ‘J-shaped’ 
curve for alcohol consumption and health, whereby a glass or 
two of wine a day is more beneficial for health than nothing, 
ot drinking to excess. Like glasses of wine, having two or three 
children is better for your health and longevity than remaining 
childless, or giving birth to four ot more.“ 
Finally, having short birth intervals between your 
children (less than eighteen months apart or having twins or 
triplets) 1s linked to worse health, increased prescriptions for 
antidepressants (hardly a surprise), and increased mortality 
than if you space your children out by two to three years. 
Researchers state that the ‘emotional, psychological and social 
strains of raising multiple children’ has ‘adverse long-term 
effects on parental health.** I concur: the stresses and strains 
of having two boys under two with no extended family on 
hand quickly took its toll on my mental health. I only hope 
that the fact I snuck my two in just after the magic age of 
thirty-three will somehow counterbalance the strain! 
Interestingly, the J-shaped relationship between health and 
number of children, and birth spacing is also present for fathers. 


[PDF page 277]

THE AGEING BRAIN 265 
The more children men have, the higher their risk of death from 
alcohol-related disease, heart disease and accidents. While it 
might be tempting to say children drive men (and women) to 
drink (or justify their glasses of wine), there’s no evidence the 
relationship between your children and your health is causal; 
instead, a vorre/ation exists. 
It remains to be seen whether cumulative exposure to 
oestrogen, or pregnancy per se contribute to longevity. However, 
broadly speaking, like an apple a day, oestrogen protects and 
keeps the doctor away. 
Certainly, there is data showing that having babies and 
breastfeeding them protects against some cancers, especially 
breast and ovarian cancer. The protective effect is strongest if 
you have children before the age of thirty and breastfeed them 
for a year or more. It’s thought protection 1s due to reduced 
exposure to monthly fluctuations of oestrogen and progesterone, 
rather than a reduction in overall exposure. 
For women who make the decision to take HRT; the results 
of eighteen vears of follow-up on HRT trials should provide 
reassurance. A report published in /4MA in 2017 found ‘no 
long-term increase in all-cause mortality or mortality from 
specific causes, such as cardiovascular disease or cancer, among 
women who received hormone replacement therapy (HRT) for 
five to seven years.*** And as we discussed in chapter 9, there 
is a teduced risk of AD and improved cognition if you start 
using HRT within the critical window (ie. beginning when 
menopausal symptoms emerge, not years later). Earlier age at 
menarche, later age at last pregnancy and use of the pill also 
protect against cognitive decline in later life. 
It’s important to note that most data on reproductive 
history, hormonal status and longevity are crunched from large 
population-based studies, often from Scandinavian countries 


[PDF page 278]

266 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
where the government keeps particularly detailed health records. 
For example, the birth-spacing finding came from Norway, 
where researchers were able to gather complete health histories 
for all women and men ever born and living in the country after 
1935. Similarly, the data on family size come from the Swedish 
population register for all people born and living in the country 
between 1932 and 1960. 
We have a tendency to turn ‘research’ into ‘me-search’ and 
view the data through our own life lens. So it’s important to keep 
in mind that the benefits and harms I’m mentioning are based 
on averages across large populations, and not always directly 
applicable to each of us. 
Thomas Petls agrees: “This does not mean women should 
wait to have children at older ages in order to improve their own 
chances of living longer. The age at last childbirth can be a rate- 
of-aging indicator. The natural ability to have a child at an older 
age likely indicates that a woman’s reproductive system is aging 
slowly, and therefore so is the rest of her body.?*° So, if you’re 
in your teens or twenties, it’s probably unwise to apply data on 
longevity to your future family planning. 
Is dementia a women’s brain 
health problem? 
More women than men develop AD or other dementias. There ate 
a number of potential biological and social reasons for this fact. 
One prevailing view is simply that, on average, women live 
longer than men, and getting older is the greatest risk factor 
for AD. 
A telated reason is men’s ‘survival bias’. Men who live to old 
age tend to be much healthier than women of the same age and 
therefore have lesser risks of developing AD. 


[PDF page 279]

THE AGEING BRAIN 267 
Another well-known genetic tisk factor for AD is the gene 
APOE-e4. A 2017 meta-analysis of nearly 58000 people found 
that women with particular versions of APOE-e4 may be more 
likely to develop AD than men with the same version of the 
gene, but only between the ages of sixty-five and seventy-five 
years.7* 
One final reason often given to account for the sex difference 
in tisk is low education in women. The mote years of schooling 
you teceive, the lower your risk of developing AD, and the 
simple fact women born before the 1950s typically completed 
fewer yeats of education than men might have rendered their 
brains more vulnerable to the disease in old age.*™* 
In September 2017 the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) 
released a report stating that dementia is the leading cause of 
death among Australian women. For men, dementia took out 
number two spot, right behind heart disease. The ABS warns 
that as treatments for heart disease improve, and men live 
longer, healthier lives, dementia will likely surpass heart disease 
as the leading cause of death for men too.” 
We are privileged to live in a world where life expectancy 1s 
increasing; and the ageing population, which worries so many 
people, is actually one of humanity’s greatest achievements. The 
cost of our longevity is that dementia has become humanity’s 
brain health problem. 
Dementia — humanity’s 
brain health problem 
The 2015 World Alzheimer Report on the global impact 
of dementia states there are over 9.9 million new cases of 
dementia each year worldwide, which implies one new case 
evety 3.2 seconds. In 2015, the estimated number of people 


[PDF page 280]

268 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
living with dementia was 22.9 million in Asia, 10.5 million in 
Europe, 4 million in Africa, and 9.4 million in the Americas. As 
baby boomers reach older age, numbers are set to double every 
twenty years.””” 
The statistics made for disturbing reading and a 2015 WHO 
report on dementia sums up how many of us feel: “Dementia is 
highly stigmatised and universally feared. It is often perceived 
as a normal part of ageing, and that no actions can be taken to 
prevent or treat it”*”" 
Although stats vary by country, your absolute risk is probably 
not as high as you fear. In the UK, about two 1n 100 (two per cent) 
of people aged sixty-five to sixty-nine have dementia; this figure 
rises to one if five (twenty per cent) for those aged eighty-five 
to eighty-nine. The majority of centenarian studies report rates 
of dementia in the extremely old as sitting somewhere between 
forty-five and sixty-five per cent, with the Sydney Centenarian 
Study rates consistent with this finding. On the upside, eighty per 
cent of people in their eighties and nearly half of centenarians 
remain dementia free. 
Take heart: contrary to popular belief, dementia is vot a 
natural or inevitable consequence of ageing. Dementia is 
a disease, and while there is no cure, there are steps you can take 
to tip the brain health scales in your favour. 
In late 2015 an international team pooled data from 323 
studies including over 5000 people and ninety-three factors 
thought to influence risk for AD, many of which also increase 
the risk for cardiovascular disease. A total of nine modifiable 
harms were found to cause sixty-six per cent of AD cases 
globally. The most significant harm was heavy smoking, whereas 
a healthy diet was protective. 
For men and women the nine modifiable risk factors included: 
being obese, smoking, carotid atherosclerosis (hardening of the 


[PDF page 281]

THE AGEING BRAIN 269 
arteries), Type 2 diabetes, low education, high total homocysteine 
level, depression, high blood pressure and frailty. 
For women, oestrogen therapy (contraceptive pill use or 
HRT) protected against AD. 
The paper concluded with a startling but heartening 
statement: two in three AD cases worldwide are pteventable.*” 
What is dementia? How does it differ 
from Alzheimer’s disease? 
Dementia is an umbrella term used to describe the symptoms 
of a large group of illnesses that cause a progressive decline in 
a person’s functioning. There are over 100 diseases that cause 
dementia symptoms including AD, frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD), vascular dementia, Parkinson’s disease, dementia with 
Lewy bodies, Huntington’s disease, alcohol-related dementia 
(Korsakoff’s syndrome) and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. AD 1s 
the most common form of dementia and accounts for fifty to 
seventy pet cent of all cases, which is why the two terms are 
often used interchangeably.””’ 
Early signs of dementia are subtle and vague. Symptoms may 
include: 
Progressive and frequent memory loss. 
Confusion. 
Personality change. 
Apathy and withdrawal. 
Anger and aggression. 
+©) 30 7© 10) +O) 4 Loss of ability to perform everyday tasks. 
Clearly these symptoms are common for a number of conditions 
such as vitamin and hormone deficiencies, depression, infections 
and brain tumours, and, as we discussed in the last chapter, 


[PDF page 282]

270 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
menopause. Therefore, it’s essential that a medical diagnosis 1s 
obtained at an early stage when symptoms first appear, to ensure 
that a person who has a treatable condition is diagnosed and 
managed correctly. 
Memory loss with ageing is normal 
One of the main symptoms of dementia is memory loss, but 
as Dementia Australia points out, there is a difference between 
forgetfulness as a normal part of ageing and as a symptom of 
dementia, which is a disease. People with dementia show perszstent 
and progressive loss of memory to the point where it interferes 
with their ability to carry out normal daily tasks.*** 
Another type of memory loss usually experienced with 
ageing is mild cognitive impairment (MCI). ‘Typical complaints 
from someone with MCI include having trouble remembering 
names of people they met recently, remembering the flow 
of a conversation, and a greater tendency to misplace things. 
However, such people are able to function independently and do 
not show other signs of dementia, such as personality change, 
confusion, impaired reasoning or judgement.?” 
It’s important to realise that even the youngest, fittest 
and most alert of us forget things from time to time. This is 
perfectly normal. So those ‘tip-of-my-tongue’ moments you may 
have experienced are pretty normal, and not necessarily a sign 
of dementia. As I said in chapter 9, there is a difference between 
normal forgetfulness and dementia. It’s standard practice to lose 
your cat keys. You only need to worry if you find them then fail 
to know what they’te used for. 
We all have a very human tendency to pay attention to 
moments of forgetfulness and worry more about them as we 
get older. And sometimes we seek out instances that confirm 
our greatest fears. For example, recently I’ve experienced a 


[PDF page 283]

THE AGEING BRAIN 271 
few mote ‘seniot moments’ than usual. Words have been on 
the tip of my tongue, and I’ve had instances of walking into a 
room then wondering what I was there to do. On reflection, I 
noticed that my ‘forgetfulness’ emerged about three weeks ago, 
precisely at the same point in time I started researching and 
writing about dementia. A prime example of confirmation bias! 
Stuck in the moment with dementia 
We tend to focus on memory loss as the cardinal sign of 
dementia. However, people with dementia not only lose their 
ability to remember the past but also to imagine the future. 
Muireann Irish is an associate professor of neuroscience at 
the University of Sydney. Irish and her team ate interested in 
how the brain systems underlying cognitive processes such 
as memory, imagination and social cognition are damaged in 
dementia. 
As a student at Trinity College in Dublin, Irish famously 
found that playing soothing music, in particular Vivaldi’s ‘Spring’ 
movement from “The Four Seasons’, enhanced autobiographical 
memory tecall in people with AD. Probing the memories of 
people’s lives by asking them to recount stories of their school 
days, weddings, births of their children, a recent holiday or 
funerals is a common method to assess memory loss.*”* 
When listening to Vivaldi versus silence, the AD patients 
became mote relaxed and less agitated, and the release of stress 
somehow enabled them to recollect and retrieve their memories. 
‘When we looked at the mechanisms by which music enhanced 
autobiographical memory, it was not due to a change in attention 
ot atousal, Irish tells me during a phone call. ‘It was due to a 
reduction 1n their anxiety.’ 
As Irish explained to me, most of us consider daydreaming to 
be an ‘idle pursuit’, not an important and fruitful brain function 


[PDF page 284]

272 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
that impacts our sense of self, wellbeing and social cognition. 
“The fact we’ve evolved to have sophisticated brain networks that 
enable us to daydream suggests it has to have some evolutionary 
adaptive value, she says. “Spontaneous mind wandering can 
give tise to great feats of creativity, new innovations, and people 
being more socially empathetic.’ 
Irish described to me a recent study in which she invited 
healthy young people and patients with dementia to visit her lab, 
and asked them. to watch a series of brightly coloured shapes 
presented ona screen (a decidedly boring task). At various 
intervals people were asked what they were thinking about. 
Invariably, healthy young people replied with fairly complex 
stoties such 4s how the yellow shape made them think of the 
sun and sand on their last island beach holiday and the fabulous 
meal they ate, which in turn reminded them they needed to 
shop for groceries for dinner that evening. “hey can’t help but 
transport themselves away from the boring task, said Irish. 
For people with dementia, their responses lacked depth and 
imagination as if they found it difficult to let their minds wander. 
“They almost get stuck, in a concrete way, on the stimulus in 
front of them. “It was a nice yellow triangle” might be a typical 
response,’ she said. 
‘For people with dementia, the world is anchored in the 
present. Their ability to remember the past gradually erodes, 
with only small islands or pockets of memories remaining, she 
said. “Losing the ability to recollect key events from the past 
strips us of our sense of identity as we cannot recall evocative 
and defining life events that have shaped us as individuals. While 
dementia patients do possess a future, it is out of reach as they 
are unable to envisage and look forward to upcoming events.’ 
Irish’s work is important because it shows that dementia 
is not just about ‘loss of memory’ but loss of our very human 


[PDF page 285]

THE AGEING BRAIN 273 
capacity to daydream and connect not only with our past but 
with our sense of self and our future. 
Taking a closer look at the ageing brain 
As we age, our brains shrink in volume and our ventricles 
(fluid-filled spaces inside the brain) enlarge. From university age 
onwards we lose roughly 0.2 per cent of our brain weight per 
year, and the pace picks up to about 0.5 per cent a year when 
we reach our seventies. So even the healthiest ninety-year-old’s 
brain won’t look the same as a millennial’s brain. 
Surprisingly, ‘healthy’ shrinkage 1s not caused by death of cells, 
rather a loss of rich connectivity between neurons. If you happen 
upon a microscope and a thin slice of ageing human cortex, 
youll notice that elderly neurons look rather like deciduous trees 
in winter. They’re missing their lush foliage as the density of their 
dendritic arbour shrinks and they retract neurites and spines. 
The traditional view that we lose thousands of brain cells 
every day is wrong. Although the evidence is mixed, perhaps the 
most surprising finding of the last twenty years — adult human 
neurogenesis — is that not only are you wot losing brain cells, you 
may be gaining them instead. 
At the autopsy table, the brain of a patient with AD will 
look like an extreme version of an elderly brain. The sad, or 
folds of cortex, will be gaping wide, ventricles will be enlarged 
and subcortical structures such as the hippocampus will be 
shrunken. But AD is not an extreme form of ageing — it is a 
disease and, as such, has a pathological fingerprint. 
While the brains of people with AD can be imaged using 
MRL, a fitm diagnosis can only be made at autopsy by viewing 
the thin sections of brain under a microscope: AD is confirmed 
by the presence of two proteins in the brain, known as amyloid 
and tau. Amyloid forms sticky patches or ‘plaques’ of dense 


[PDF page 286]

274 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
material ov/side neurons. Plaques ate often surrounded by dead 
and dying neurons, swollen axons and dendrites, astrocytes and 
microglia (a marker of inflammation). If you zoom a microscope 
lens in further, you'll see twisted filaments of tau, which 
agereoate zside surviving neurons. 
How amyloid plaques and tau tangles interact to cause AD 
symptoms remains a puzzle. ‘Typically, as AD _ progresses, 
amyloid and tau deposits spread through the brain, although, 
curiously, the pathology of the disease does not always correlate 
with symptoms. For example, you could have very mild 
symptoms but extensive amyloid accumulation and cell death, or 
vice versa. One risk factor for the formation of amyloid plaques 
is a variation df the gene APOE-e4. However, the presence of 
the gene variation is not itself predictive or diagnostic of AD. 
Only forty per cent of people with AD carry the gene, and many 
carriers nevet go on to develop the disease. 
This conundrum has led some researchers to suggest 
that amyloid is necessary but not sufficient for AD. One working 
hypothesis is that once amyloid appears on the scene, tau 
accelerates the damage it causes. A commonly used analogy is 
that amyloid represents the ‘bullet’ and tau is the ‘gun’.*” 
Despite evidence that amyloid accumulation triggers the 
AD ‘cascade’, a cute remains elusive. Trials of vaccines and 
treatments protect against amyloid, once so promising in rodents 
and primates, have failed in humans. 
Underlying the changes in this devastating disease are at 
least four related biological processes: inflammation, oxidation, 
glucose and lipid dysregulation — well-known markets of 
lifestyle disease. While a cure for those already suffering AD 
continues to elude, and the mechanisms leading to the cascade 
of pathology are debated, most researchers believe that up to 
two in three dementia cases can be prevented by lifestyle change. 


[PDF page 287]

THE AGEING BRAIN 275 
Proof of principle — using lifestyle 
change to slow disease 
‘We're all dealt our unique genetic deck of cards at conception. 
What matters is how we choose to play our hand.” These wise 
words were spoken by Professor Tony Hannan, head of the 
Epigenetics and Neural Plasticity Laboratory at the Florey 
Institute in Melbourne. Hannan’s focus is on understanding how 
genes (nature) and the environment (nurture) contribute to brain 
health and to specific brain disorders. ‘We’re trying to work out 
a little more about the complex interactions between genes and 
the environment, and how this translates into susceptibility to 
neurological and psychiatric conditions.’ 
Hannan and I first met in Oxford, where he was a postdoc 
working a few doors along the hall from my PhD lab. He was 
also delving into the new frontier of nature, nurture and brain 
plasticity research alongside renowned neurobiologist Colin 
Blakemore. During this time Hannan worked with mice that 
had the human gene for Huntington’s disease (HD) embedded 
into their DNA. In humans, HD 1s a brain disease passed 
down from parent to child that causes uncontrollable dance- 
like or jerking movements (chorea), dementia and depression. 
‘Up until that point, Huntington’s was considered to be 100 
per cent genetically determined, he reminded me when we 
caught up recently, ‘but we delayed the onset of the disease with 
environmental enrichment.’ 
Compared to their cousins in the wild, lab animals live 
rather minimalist, unstimulating lives with basic access to 
food, water and nesting material. Animals in the wild survive 
by foraging for food and those most adept at outsmarting their 
predators and competing for resources thrive. It’s reasonable to 
consider laboratory animals as ‘couch potatoes’ that, compared 


[PDF page 288]

276 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
to rodents in the wild, have sedentary lives with little cognitive 
challenge.*”° 
To simulate life in the wild, Hannan split his HD mice into 
two groups. Half maintained their couch-potato existence, and 
half were moved to live in environmentally enriched conditions 
with access to tunnels, ladders, blocks, mazes and running 
wheels. ‘We discovered that giving this increased sensory and 
cognitive stimulation and physical exercise delayed the onset 
of Huntington’s disease in mice, says Hannan. His startling 
discovery was the first to demonstrate the benefits of enriching 
experiences on the progress of HD, once thought to be ‘the 
epitome of genetic brain diseases’. 
Hannan points out that environmental enrichment in 
lab animals is roughly equivalent to education in humans. 
Overwhelmingly the evidence shows that people who attend 
university undergo less cognitive decline in older age, and are less 
likely to develop AD than people with fewer years of education. 
The evidence also points towards certain kinds of challenging 
jobs (e.g. air traffic controller, financial analyst, doctor) as 
having the potential to enhance and protect the brain. One 
study analysed 4182 retirees who’d been doing the same type 
of work for roughly twenty-five years before they retired. The 
mental requirements of each job (e.g. analysing data, developing 
objectives and strategies, making decisions, solving problems, 
evaluating information and thinking creatively) were assessed 
alongside each retiree’s cognitive health and memory.*”’ 
Retirees who had worked in jobs with greater mental 
demands were mote likely to have better memories before they 
retired, and more likely to have slower declines in memory 
after retiring than people who had worked in jobs with fewer 
mental demands. Work, education or any type of intellectual 
enrichment that involves a lot of thinking, analysing, problem 


[PDF page 289]

THE AGEING BRAIN 277 
solving, creativity and other complex mental processing helps 
build ‘cognitive reserve’. 
Cognitive reserve refers to the brain’s resilience or ability 
to cope despite damage or degeneration. Professor Yaakov 
Stern, one of the earliest proponents of the notion, explains, 
‘In people with a high degree of cognitive reserve, AD 
pathology will still occur, but people are somehow able to 
compensate for that damage. Some won’t ever be diagnosed 
with Alzheimer’s because they don’t present any symptoms,’ 
says Stern. “Some individuals have a greater number of neurons 
and synapses, and somehow those extra structures provide a 
level of protection.’”””® 
So where does that leave you if you’re not a university- 
educated air traffic controller with a side gig in medicine? Is it 
ever too late to build cognitive reserve? 
Thankfully, the answer is ‘no’. Cognitive decline is not 
inevitable, because intellectual enrichment goes beyond 
the work people do. A 2014 Mayo Clinic report found that 
engagement in cognitively stimulating activities two or three 
times a week after the age of sixty-five, such as reading books 
and magazines, playing games or music, artistic activities, craft, 
social activities and computer activities, all help. Engaging in 
these activities two or three times a week during mid- and later 
life may help delay the onset of dementia and tip the scales in 
your favour.*” 
Hannan’s discovery was published in the journal Nature 
in 2000 and paved the way for hundreds of studies extolling 
the virtues of exercise and cognitive challenge to enhance 
neuroplasticity, and prevent or treat brain disease and injury. 
He hopes discoveries in the field of neuroplasticity will inspire 
each of us to choose to protect our brains from the relentless 
weathering of ageing and disease. 


[PDF page 290]

278 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
How to nurture a healthy brain for life 
Our human ancestors likely evolved facing similar survival 
challenges to other species. Whereas the need to acquire 
food was a major day-to-day challenge during much of our 
evolutionary history, today we live with a constant oversupply 
of food. Instead, the intellectual demands of modern life 
centre on the sedentary tasks of work and education. ‘Regular 
intellectual challenges are critical for brain development and a 
successful career, and recent findings suggest that intermittent 
exercise and energy restriction can further enhance and then 
sustain the functional capabilities of the brain during ageing,’ 
writes Mark P°* Mattson in Agecng Brain Reviews. Rather like an 
animal in the wild, our intellect evolved to function optimally 
when we’re motivated towards a goal, slightly hungry and on 
the run, a state Mattson likens to ‘Hunger Games’ — bolstered 
brainpower.’”” 
In a 2017 Trends in Neurosciences paper, University of Arizona 
researchers David Raichlen and Gene Alexander support 
Mattson’s case that our brains are a product of our evolutionary 
past. They argue that as humans transitioned from a relatively 
sedentary apelike existence to a more physically demanding 
hunter—gatherer lifestyle, starting around two million years 
ago, we began to engage in complex foraging tasks that 
were simultaneously physically and mentally demanding, and 
that may explain how moving and thinking came to be so 
connected.*"! 
The evidence from modern science and ancient wisdom 
is cleat: how we eat, move, sleep, form relationships and find 
meaning is intimately connected to how our brains grow, think, 
feel and, ultimately, age. 


[PDF page 291]

THE AGEING BRAIN 279 
The best exercise for your brain is physical exercise 
Our brains and nervous systems evolved to move us around, 
sense and interact with the world. Human cognitive prowess 
and intellect evolved while we were on foot. When faced with 
inactivity, as is common in our modern-day lives, our brains 
tespond by reducing capacity for neuroplasticity and, as a 
consequence, brain ageing speeds up. 
We have rock-solid evidence that exercise improves mood 
and reduces risk for age-related brain disease. A 2013 review 
of twenty-four randomised control trials and twenty-one 
prospective cohort studies calculated that at least one zm seven cases 
of AD could be prevented if everyone who is currently inactwe took up 
exercise? 
What type of physical exercise is best? 
Jeanne Calment never attended an aerobics class or lifted 
weights; instead, she rode her bike until she was 100, and 
lived in a second-storey apartment with no lift until she 
was 110. People living in Blue Zones don’t run marathons, 
weat Fitbits or join CrossFit gyms. Instead, they live in 
environments that constantly ‘nudge’ them into moving 
without thinking about it. Bike to the grocery store, gather 
food from the garden, sweep leaves instead of using leaf- 
blowers, stand instead of sit, swim in the sea, walk to work. 
Simply moving our bodies throughout our day, instead of 
exetcising to ‘get fit’ or ‘lose weight’, is the best way we know 
to keep our brains fit and well. 
Eat real food, not too much, mostly plants 
Our ancestors and their smart brains were trotting across the 
landscape hunting, fishing and foraging for food. We evolved to 


[PDF page 292]

280 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
eat food from the rivers, forest and sky. We are also adaptable, 
and the many versions of a ‘healthy diet’ vary by country and 
culture (and, today, by social media platform). What sets apart 
those who live the longest is not the minutiae of their diet and 
balance of nutrients gained from fats, protein or carbohydrates, 
but the absence of refined processed foods. 
Evidence from epidemiological studies such as the Blue 
Zones and clinical trials strongly implicates a Mediterranean- 
style diet in slowing brain ageing. And most recently a clinical 
trial in Australia proved successful in treating depression by 
encouraging young people with depression to increase their 
consumption of vegetables, fruits, wholegrains, legumes, 
fish, lean red “meats, olive oil and nuts, while reducing their 
consumption of unhealthy ‘extras’: foods such as sweets, refined 
cereals, fried food, fast food, processed meats and sugary 
drinks.*” 
When we eat we’re consuming not only nutrients but energy 
in the form of calories. Researchers, such as the Dunedin Study 
team, ate now unravelling the relationships among calories, 
lifespan, health-span and cognitive health. Calorie restriction 
(eating less) and intermittent fasting (fasting on and off) 
increase longevity in all species thus far observed, from yeast to 
rodents to primates — and it’s assumed the same 1s true for us. 
This notion ties back to the ‘Hunger Games’ concept whereby 
our brains evolved to function most optimally when we’te 
hungry and looking for food.*’* Eating less benefits our glucose 
control and cholesterol, and may produce mild neuronal stress 
which engages signalling pathways that improve the ability of 
the brain to resist ageing. 
Dietary advice for brain health can be summed up by Michael 
Pollan’s famous adage, ‘Eat real food, not too much, mostly 
plants.” 


[PDF page 293]

THE AGEING BRAIN 281 
Get more sleep 
As earthlings, our biological rhythms are determined by the 
tising and setting of the sun. Our sleep patterns, hormone 
telease, blood pressure and body temperature, ebb and flow in 
syne with day and night. 
Modern-day life with its artificial lighting late at night, 
alarm clocks, shift work, iPhones in bed and jetlag is very 
good at interfering with our natural sleep patterns. As a basic 
biological function, sleep is overlooked and under-appreciated, 
and globally modern humans are chronically sleep deprived. 
Sleep deprivation (even a few hours a night) impacts cognition, 
mood, memory and learning, and long-term sleep deprivation 
leads to chronic disease including depression, diabetes and 
cardiovascular disease, all risk factors for developing dementia. 
A good night’s sleep every night should be a priority, not a 
luxury. My personal daily indulgence — a short afternoon nap — 
consolidates memory, sparks creativity and smooths rough 
emotional edges, giving greater control over thoughts and 
feelings. 
Challenge your mind 
Lab mice kept in bate cages with no toys or novel environments 
to explore show greater rates of age-related cognitive decline 
compared to their counterparts kept in enriched environments 
full of toys, tunnels and mazes. As we’ve discussed, humans are 
no different. 
People who stay mentally engaged in life and who constantly 
challenge themselves to step out of their comfort zones have 
reduced tisk of age-related cognitive decline and dementia. 
Children have a natural tendency to run and play, whereas 
adults tend to take life more seriously. We don’t lose the need 


[PDF page 294]

282 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
for novelty and pleasure once we grow up. Game playing — 
whether it be video, traditional board games, dancing, or team 
or individual sports — has been shown to alleviate boredom, 
anxiety, depression, loneliness, despair and even physical 
pain. As Charlene Levitan said to me, “We don’t stop playing 
and learning because we get old, we grow old because we stop 
playing and learning.’ 
Find your place or moment of calm 
Throughout this book, one pervasive theme has been how 
stress ‘gets under our skin’ to influence our mental and physical 
health. Not all stress is bad, but chronic or toxic stress, especially 
traumatic life events that are out of our control, has deleterious 
effects. The key to buffering stress is to find ways to improve 
your perceived ability to cope with whatever life throws your 
way. 
The evidence is mixed as to whether or not stress causes 
dementia, but it’s clear stress hormones alter risk for anxiety, 
depression, obesity and cardiovascular disease, which in turn 
increase dementia risk.*”° 
More has been spoken or written about the practice of 
mindfulness meditation in recent years than any other stress- 
telief practice. With good reason: paying attention to your 
breath, which is a cote component of many mindfulness 
ptactices, reduces anxiety and depression, and improves sleep. 
Blue Zones people have in place varied daily rituals that 
reduce or buffer the impact of stress in their lives. Activities 
include prayer, napping and happy hour with friends (I'll add 
walking the dog or enjoying a good book to the mix). 
Find peace amid the chaos. Find your place or moment of 
calm. 


[PDF page 295]

THE AGEING BRAIN 283 
Connect with family and friends 
After we foraged, caught and hunted our food, we trotted back 
to our tribe. Being socially connected to other people protects 
against stress, and because socialising involves many cognitive 
functions such as thinking, feeling, sensing, reasoning and 
intuition, friendships contribute to cognitive reserve. 
Old age brings ‘costs of survivorship’. ‘We lose people 
with whom we shared many experiences, who are central to 
our identities, and who ate no longer there to validate — or 
to question — our memories or accounts. This kind of identity 
loss also occurs with the death of older generations, as we 
are pushed up the family ladder and, once at the top, become 
orphans in time, writes one researcher.*” 
A 2010 meta-analysis of 148 studies including 300000 people, 
who were tracked for nearly eight years after completing surveys 
of how often they met with family and friends, found that 
socially connected folks live longer. On the flipside, loneliness 
was associated with late-life loss of cognition, as well as elevated 
blood pressure, depression and poor sleep. The startling 
conclusion of this report was that the influence of social isolation 
on health and tisk of death was comparable to smoking.*”” 
_ Seek out Meaning and purpose 
With purpose and meaning come positive emotions — love, 
compassion and appreciation — which counteract stress and 
support a healthy brain throughout life. Blue Zones residents are 
members of faith communities and find meaning and purpose 
through social connection and spirituality. Living a meaningful 
life seems an unlikely addition to a book about the brain, but 
‘purpose in life’ is a concept in neuroscience that links to robust 
brain and mind health. 


[PDF page 296]

284 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Purpose, defined as the tendency to derive meaning from 
life’s experiences and to possess a sense of intentionality and 
goal directedness that guides behaviour, can be quantified. A 
study published in Archives of General Psychiatry in 2010 examined 
the association of purpose in life with risk of AD in more than 
900 elderly people living in residential care. During the seven 
years of follow-up, greater purpose in life was associated with a 
substantially reduced risk of AD, such that a person with a high 
score on the purpose in life measure was approximately two and 
a half times more likely to remain free of AD than a person 
with a low score.*”* 
Have you figured out why you’re here? What’s your north 
star? Your skigai? Your plan de vida? There ate possibly many 
clever strategies to find the meaning of your life — somewhere 
in the nexus of passion, skillset, employment opportunity, 
education and service to others. American psychologist William 
James said in 1920 that the ‘deepest principle in human natute is 
the craving to be appreciated’. 
Recently Pve come across a simpler way to determine 
purpose. Over the years P’ve taken to the stage with Paul 
Baldock, a bone biologist at Sydney’s Garvan Institute of 
Medical Research. We’te often called on to share our wisdom, 
purpose and what we’ve learned on our career paths in science. 
Baldock has developed a novel formula for every decision he 
makes whether it be in the research lab, career, or life. He simply 
asks, “Is it awesome? Does it help?” 
Is it ever too late to hope for change? 
In an impressive feat of brain plasticity, an enriching life 
experience changed Jeanne Calment’s brain at age 118. 


[PDF page 297]

THE AGEING BRAIN 285 
Calment lived an extraordinary life for a woman of her 
generation. She attended school until the age of sixteen and 
graduated with a diploma. At twenty-one she married a wealthy 
distant cousin and recounted to biographers the details of their 
active lifestyle within the upper society of Arles, pursuing 
hobbies such as fencing, cycling, mountaineering, swimming, 
hunting, playing piano and painting, and going to the opera in 
Marseilles. ‘I had fun; I am having fun, she said.?” 
When Calment was 118, the neuropsychologist Karen Ritchie 
visited a number of times over a six-month period to examine 
Calment and submit her to a battery of neuropsychological tests. 
Ritchie writes, ‘Until this program of testing was commenced 
J.C. had no contact with the outside world apart from the 
occasional greeting from medical staff and an annual visit from 
journalists on the occasion of her birthday. For the last three 
years she has spent her days alone in her room in her armchait.’ 
According to records, Calment enjoyed contributing to the study 
by recalling the poems, fables and songs she had learned as a 
child. ‘I don’t lack for anything. I have everything I need. I’ve 
had a good life. I live in my dreams, in my memories, beautiful 
memoties.’ 
Brain scans showed atrophy of Calment’s cortex, but her 
overall cognitive performance was, in fact, far better than might 
have been predicted from the extent of brain loss observed. 
‘There is no evidence at present of senile dementia ... Executive 
functions (principally controlled by frontal areas), while having 
deteriorated from young adult levels, appear to be relatively 
spated ... This raises the question of whether an initially high 
level of intellectual ability may have been a protective factor, 
writes Ritchie.*” 
Remarkably, over the six-month period that Ritchie conducted 
the testing program, Calment’s test scores “proved. Her verbal 


[PDF page 298]

286 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
recall, narrative recall, verbal fluency and mathematics scores 
increased from baseline to match those of the average seventy- 
five to eighty-year-old. Environmental enrichment by way of 
social interaction with Ritchie and her team, and intellectual 
stimulation from the testing program activated the latent 
plasticity in Calment’s exceptionally long-lived brain. 
Jeanne Calment no doubt had memories that she didn’t share, 
but there was one secret that she wanted to pass on: ‘Always 
keep your sense of humour. ‘That’s what I attribute my long life 
to. I think I'll die laughing. That’s part of my program.’*”! 


[PDF page 299]

Acknowledgements 
I’M A RESEARCHER BY NATURE. LIBRARIES ARE MY NATURAL 
habitat, with books and papers the tools of my trade. Even 
so, writing a book is a long, lonely task that involves a lot of 
time sitting around staring at a screen — not the heathiest 
ptescription for longevity and brain health! That said, the 
process has been extraordinarily engaging and purposeful. One 
of the most beautiful sentiments I came across in my research 
for this book is that our individual life stories are enmeshed 
with the life stories of other people — we come from someone 
and somewhere. A story of ‘me’ is actually a story of ‘we’, and 
thanks must go to all those involved. 
To my agent Jeanne Ryckmans, for phoning out of the blue 
one day to ask me why Vd never written a book, convincing 
me it might be a good idea, and for injecting dramatic fission 
and hilarious stories along the way. The book would never have 
come to fruition without you. Thanks to the Sydney publishing 
team at Hachette. Especially Sophie Hamley for taking a punt 
on a one-page chapter outline, and for taking me by hand and 
answering all my novice questions. To the London team at 
Orion Books, especially Olivia Morris, your enthusiasm for the 
project came at the perfect time. And to Chris Kunz and Sophie 
Mayfield for your warm comments and sympathetic editing of 
the final manuscript. 
To Carol Dean, Brigitte Todd, Michelle Guillemard, Dyan 
Lewis, Kristy Goodwin, Suzanne Newton, Isiah McKimmie, 
Ruth Hadfield, Bianca Nogtady and Jocelyn Brewer, the 
experience was enriched thanks to your editing and manuscript 
suggestions, professional connections, quotes, publishing advice, 
friendship and virtual gin. 
287 


[PDF page 300]

288 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
To the many researchers who gave so willingly and candidly 
of your time over coffee, lunch, phone and Skype (and at times 
neatly convinced me to consider lab life again), especially Richie 
Poulton, Bronwyn Graham, Colin and Sarah Akerman, Dave 
Grattan, Catherine Lebel, Jessica Mong, Margaret McCarthy, 
Kathleen Liberty, George Patton, Sarah Romans, Jayashri 
Kulkarni, Lianne Schmaal, Brendan Zietsch, Sarah Whittle, 
John Eden, Nicole Gervais, Sue Davis, Sonia Davison, ‘Tony 
Hannan, Charlene Levitan, Lisa Mundy, Lauren Rosewarne and 
Muireann Irish. And to the many others I’ve not met but whose 
reseatch, books and articles informed and inspired this book; 
any errors reporting your science ate my own. 
To my far-flung family, friends and neighbourhood crew, 
your unending supportive Facebook comments and shared 
bottles of wine made all the difference. 
To my affectionate, loyal and furry co-author, Jasper, for 
patiently listening to me read every single word of this book out 
loud. You’te truly a woman’s best friend. 
To Dad, especially, for commenting on every single one of 
my whingeing Facebook posts how proud you are of me. 
‘To Mum and Vicks. Your stories are here, too. 
Finally, to my beautiful boys, Harry and Jamie, and gorgeous 
husband, Geoff. Guess what? Mum is no longer ‘writing her 
book’! The last year may have stolen my attention and time away 
from you, but the three of you always have my heart. This book 
is dedicated to you. 


[PDF page 301]

Notes 
INTRODUCTION 
1. Zucker, I. and A.K. Beery, ‘Males still dominate animal studies’. 
Nature, 2010. 465(7299): p. 690. 
2. Clayton, J.A., ‘Studying both sexes: a guiding principle for 
biomedicine’. FASEB J, 2016. 30(2): pp. 519-24. 
3. Klein, S.L., et al., ‘Opinion: Sex inclusion in basic research drives 
discovery’. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2015. 112(17): pp. 5257-8. 
4. Beery, A.K. and I. Zucker, ‘Sex bias in neuroscience and biomedical 
research’. Neurosci Biobehav Rev, 2011. 35(3): pp. 565-72. 
5. Cahill, L., ‘An issue whose time has come’. ] Neurosci Res, 2017. 95(1—2): 
pp. 12-13. 
6. Rippon, G., “Blame the brain: How Neurononsense joined 
Psychobabble to keep women in their place’, in Lecture to the Royal 
Institution. 2016, The Royal Institution: London. 
7. Joel, D., et al., ‘Sex beyond the genitalia: The human brain mosaic’. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S_A, 2015. 112(50): pp. 15468-73. 
NAPLAN, ‘2016 NAPLAN National Report’. 2016: Australia. 
. McCarthy, M.M., ‘Sex Differences in the Brain.’, in The Scientist. 2015. 
10. Fine, C., Delusions of Gender. The Real Science Behind Sex Differences. 2010, 
London: Icon Books. 
11. Ehtt, L., Pink Brain, Blue Brain: How Small Differences Grow Into 
Troublesome Gaps — And What We Can Do About It. 2010, New York: 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt 
12. Green, E.R. and L. Maurer, The Teaching Transgender Toolkit. .A Facilitator's 
Guide To Increasing Knowledge, Decreasing Prejudice ¢» Building Skills. 2015, 
NY: Out for Health & Planned Parenthood of the Southern Finger 
Lakes. 
289 


[PDF page 302]

290 
13. 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
‘Sex and Gender. It’s Not a Women’s Issue’. Scientific American, 2017, 
Springer Nature: New York. 
CHAPTER 1: IN UTERO 
14, 
18. 
1S 
Ezkurdia, I., et al., ‘Multiple evidence strands suggest that there may 
be as few as 19,000 human protein-coding genes’. Hum Mo/ Genet, 2014. 
23(22): pp. 5866-78. 
Darlington, C.L., The Female Brain. 2nd ed. Conceptual advances in 
brain research. 2009, Boca Raton, FL.: Taylor & Francis Group. 
Vaitukaitis, ].L., ‘Development of the home pregnancy test’. Aun N Y 
Acad Sct, 2004. 1038: pp. 220-2. 
Bale, T.L., “The placenta and neurodevelopment: sex differences in 
prenatal vulnerability’. Dialogues Clin Neurosci, 2016. 18(4): pp. 459-64. 
Blom, H.]., et al., ‘Neural tube defects and folate: case far from closed’, 
Nat Rev Neurosci, 2006. 7(9): pp. 724-31. 
Wilhelm, D., S. Palmer and P. Koopman, ‘Sex determination and 
gonadal development in mammals’. Physio/ Rev, 2007. 87(1): pp. 1-28. 
Graves, J., ‘Differences between men and women are more than the 
sum of their genes’. 2015, The Conversation. 
De Mees, C., et al., ‘Alpha-fetoprotein controls female fertility 
and prenatal development of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
pathway through an antiestrogenic action’. Mo/ Ce// Bio/, 2006. 26(5): 
pp- 2012-18. 
Fine, C., et al., “Plasticity, plasticity, plasticity ... and the rigid problem 
of sex’. Trends Cogn Sci, 2013. 17(11): pp. 550-1. 
Sacks, O., The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. 1985, London: 
Picador Classic. 
Eriksson, P.S., et al., “Neurogenesis in the adult human hippocampus’. 
Nat Med, 1998. 4(11): pp. 1313-17. 
Dennis, CV., et al., ‘Human adult neurogenesis across the ages: An 
immunohistochemical study’. Newropathol App/ Neurobiol, 2016. 42(7): 
pp. 621-38. 
Wa, J., et al., “Available Evidence of Association between Zika Virus 
and Microcephaly’. Chin Med ] (Engl), 2016. 129(19): pp. 2347-56. 
Wu, K-Y,, et al., ‘Vertical transmission of Zika virus targeting the 
radial glial cells affects cortex development of offspring mice’. Ce// Res, 
2016. 26(6): pp. 645-54. 
Ekblad, M., J. Korkeila and L. Lehtonen, ‘Smoking during pregnancy 
affects foetal brain development’. Acta Paediatr, 2015. 104(1): pp. 12-18. 


[PDF page 303]

29. 
SiO} 
Bl 
oe 
NOTES 291 
Ramsay, H., et al., ‘Smoking in pregnancy, adolescent mental health and 
cognitive performance in young adult offspring: results from a matched 
sample within a Finnish cohort’. BMC Psychiatry, 2016. 16(1): p. 430. 
Turner-Cobb, J.M., Child Health Psychology: A biopsychosocial perspective. 
2014, Los Angeles: Sage. 
DiPietro, J.A., et al., ‘Maternal psychological distress during pregnancy 
in relation to child development at age two’. Chi/d Dev, 2006. 77(3): 
pp. 573-87. 
King, S., et al., “Using natural disasters to study the effects of prenatal 
maternal stress on child health and development’. Birth Defects Res C 
Embryo Today, 2012. 96(4): pp. 273-88. 
CHAPTER 2: CHILDHOOD 
ao; 
34. 
ao, 
36. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43, 
Jernigan, T.L., et al., “Postnatal brain development: structural imaging 
of dynamic neurodevelopmental processes’. Prog Brain Res, 2011. 189: 
pp. 77-92. 
Lebel, C. and C. Beaulieu, “Longitudinal development of human brain 
wiring continues from childhood into adulthood’. ] Newrosc, 2011. 
31(30): pp. 10937—47. 
Stiles, J. and T.L. Jernigan, “The basics of brain development’. 
Neuropsychol Rev, 2010. 20(4): pp. 327-48. 
Newby, J., “The New Science of Wisdom’, in Ca/a/yst. L. Heywood, 
Editor. 2006: ABC. 
Gopnik, A., ‘How babies think’. Sczentific American, 2010 (July). 
Takesian, A.E. and T.K. Hensch, ‘Balancing plasticity/stablity across 
brain development’, in Progress in Brain Research. 2013, Elsevier. 
Fagiolini, M., et al., “Specific GABAA circuits for visual cortical 
plasticity’. Sczence, 2004. 303(5664): pp. 1681-3. 
Hensch, T.K., “The Power of the Infant Brain’. Scz_Am, 2016. 314(2): 
pp- 64-9. 
Friedmann, N. and D. Rusou, ‘Critical period for first language: the 
crucial role of language input during the first year of life’. Curr Opin 
Neurobiol, 2015, 35: pp. 27-34. 
Kuhl, P.K. and A.R. Damasio, ‘Language’, in Principles of Neural 
Science, E.R. Kandel, J.H. Schwartz, T.M. Jessell, S.A. Siegelbaum, AJ. 
Hudspeth, Editors. 2013, New York: McGraw Hill Medical. 
Preisler, G., ‘Development of communication in children with 
sensory functional disabilities’, in The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook of Infant 
Development. 2010, Wiley Blackwell: Chichester. 


[PDF page 304]

292 
44. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
Di 
52: 
Do: 
54. 
Dai 
56; 
ove 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Sonuga-Barke, E.]., et al., ‘Child-to-adult neurodevelopmental and 
mental health trajectories after early life deprivation: the young adult 
follow-up of the longitudinal English and Romanian Adoptees study’. 
Lancet, 2017. 
Center on the Developing Child. “Toxic Stress’. 2017 [cited 23 March 
2017]; Available from: http://developingchild.harvard.edu/science/key- 
concepts/toxic-stress/. 
Caspi, A., et al., ‘Childhood forecasting of a small segment of the 
population with large economic burden’. Nature Human Behaviour 
2016. 1. 
Liberty, K., et al., ‘Behavior Problems and Post-traumatic Stress 
Symptoms in Children Beginning School: A Comparison of Pre- and 
Post-Earthquake Groups. “ PLOS Currents Disasters., 2016. 1. 
Lupien, S.J., et al., “Effects of stress throughout the lifespan on 
the brain, behaviour and cognition’. Nat Rev Neurosci, 2009. 10(6): 
pp. 434-45. 
Krugers, H,J., et al., ‘Early life adversity: Lasting consequences for 
emotional learning’. Neurobiol Stress, 2017. 6: pp. 14-21. 
Heetkamp, T. and I. deTerte, ‘PTSD and Resilience in Adolescents after 
New Zealand Earthquakes’. New Zealand Journal of Psychology, 2015. 44(1). 
Lambert, S., et al., ‘Indigenous resilience through urban disaster: 
The Maori response to the 2010 and 2011 Christchurch Otautahi 
earthquakes’. Proceedings of the International Indigenous Development Research 
Conference, 2012. Auckland Nga Pae o te Maramatanga. 
Pasterski, V.,S. Golombok and M. Hines, ‘Sex differences in social 
behaviour’, in The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Social Development, 
P.K. Smith and C.H. Hart, Editors. 2014, Wiley Blackwell: Chichester. 
Hines, M., et al., ‘Prenatal androgen exposure alters girls’ responses to 
information indicating gender-appropriate behaviour’. Philos Trans R Soc 
Lond B Biol Sci, 2016. 371(1688): p. 20150125. 
Kuiri-Hanninen, T., U. Sankilampi and L. Dunkel, ‘Activation of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis in infancy: minipuberty’. Horm Res 
Paediatr, 2014. 82(2): pp. 73-80. 
Lonsdorf, E.V., ‘Sex differences in nonhuman primate behavioral 
development’. ] Newrosci Res, 2017. 95(1—2): pp. 213-21. 
Robles de Medina, P.G., et al., ‘Fetal behaviour does not differ between 
boys and girls’. Early Hum Dev, 2003. 73(1—2): pp. 17-26. 
Aznar, A. and H.R. Tenenbaum, ‘Gender and age differences in 
parent-child emotion talk’. Br { Dev Psychol, 2015. 33(1): pp. 148-55. 


[PDF page 305]

58. 
5D. 
60. 
6l. 
NOTES 293 
Tenenbaum, H.R., S. Ford and B. Alkhedairy, “Telling stories: gender 
differences in peers’ emotion talk and communication style’. Br J Dev 
Psychol, 2011. 29(Pt 4): pp. 707-21. 
Leman, P.j. and H.R. Tenenbaum, ‘Practising gender: children’s 
relationships and the development of gendered behaviour and beliefs’. 
Br ] Dev Psychol, 2011. 29(Pt 2): pp. 153-7. 
Maney, D.L., ‘Just like a circus: the public consumption of sex 
differences’. Curr Top Behav Neurosci, 2015. 19: pp. 279-96. 
von Stumm, S., T. Chamorro-Premuzic and A. Furnham, 
‘Decomposing self-estimates of intelligence: structure and sex 
differences across 12 nations’. Br J Psycho/, 2009. 100(Pt 2): pp. 429-42. 
Bian, L., S. J. Leslie and A. Cimpian, ‘Gender stereotypes about 
intellectual ability emerge early and influence children’s interests’. 
Science, 2017. 355(6323): pp. 389-391. 
Goodwin, K., Ravsing your child in a digital world. 2016, Sydney: Finch 
Publishing. 
CHAPTER 3: PUBERTY 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
Tal, 
Oberfield, S.E., A.B. Sopher and A.T. Gerken, ‘Approach to the girl 
with early onset of pubic hair’. | Cin Endocrinol Metab, 2011. 96(6): 
pp. 1610-22. 
Mundy, L.K., et al., ‘Adrenarche and the Emotional and Behavioral 
Problems of Late Childhood’. | Adolesc Health, 2015. 57(6): pp. 608-16. 
Delany, F.M., et al., ‘Depression, immune function, and early 
adrenarche in children’. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2016. 63: pp. 228-34. 
Whittle, S., et al., ‘Associations between early adrenarche, affective 
brain function and mental health in children’, Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci, 
2015, 10(9): pp. 1282-90. 
Klauser, P., et al., ‘Reduced frontal white matter volume in children with 
early onset of adrenarche’. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2015. 52: pp. 111-18. 
Byrne, M.L., et al., ‘A systematic review of adrenarche as a sensitive 
period in neurobiological development and mental health’. Dev Cogn 
Neurosci, 2017. 25: pp. 12-28. 
Australian Institute of Family Studies, “The Longitudinal Study 
of Australian Children Annual Statistical Report 2015’. 2016, 
Commonwealth of Australia: Melbourne. 
Seminara, S.B. and W.F. Crowley, Jr., ‘Kisspeptin and GPR54: 
discovery of a novel pathway in reproduction’. | Ne#roendocrinol, 2008. 
20(6): pp. 727-31. 


[PDF page 306]

294 THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
72. de Roux, N., et al., ‘Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism due to loss of 
function of the KiSS1—derived peptide receptor GPR54’. Proc Natl 
Aad Sci U S A, 2003. 100(19): pp. 10972—6. 
73. Herman-Giddens, M.E., et al., ‘Secondary sexual characteristics and 
menses in young girls seen in office practice: a study from the Pediatric 
Research in Office Settings network’. Pediatrics, 1997. 99(4): pp. 505-12. 
74. Biro, F.M., et al., ‘Onset of breast development in a longitudinal 
cohort’. Pediatrics, 2013. 132(6): pp. 1019-27. 
75. Greenspan, L. and J. Deardorff, The New Puberty. How to navigate early 
development in today’s girls. 2014, New York: Rodale. 
76. Aksglaede, L., et al., ‘Age at puberty and the emerging obesity 
epidemic’. PLoS One, 2009. 4(12): p. e8450. 
77. Balzer, B.W., et al., “The effects of estradiol on mood and behavior in 
human female adolescents: a systematic review. Eur J Pediatr, 2015. 
174(3): pp. 289-98. 
CHAPTER 4: THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 
78. Rosewarne, L., Periods in Pop Culture: Menstruation in Film and Television 
2012, London: Lexington Books. 
79. Angier, N., Woman. An Intimate Geography. 2014, London: Virago. 
80. ‘Toffoletto, S., et al., ‘Emotional and cognitive functional imaging 
of estrogen and progesterone effects in the female human brain: a 
systematic review’. Prychoneuroendocrinology, 2014. 50: pp. 28-52. 
81. Sundstrom-Poromaa, I. and M. Gingnell, ‘Menstrual cycle influence 
on cognitive function and emotion processing — from a reproductive 
perspective’. Front Neurosci, 2014. 8: p. 380. 
82. Ferree, N.K., R. Kamat and L. Cahill, ‘Influences of menstrual 
cycle position and sex hormone levels on spontaneous intrusive 
recollections following emotional stimuli’. Conscious Cogn, 2011. 20(4): 
pp. 1154-62. 
83. McCarthy, M.M., ‘Multifaceted origins of sex differences in the brain’. 
Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Béol Sci, 2016. 371(1688): p. 20150106. 
84. Bramble, M.S., et al., ‘Effects of chromosomal sex and hormonal 
influences on shaping sex differences in brain and behavior: Lessons 
from cases of disorders of sex development’. ] Neurosci Res, 2017. 
95(1—2): pp. 65-74. 
85. Irwing, P. and R. Lynn, ‘Sex differences in means and variability on 
the progressive matrices in university students: a meta-analysis’. Br J 
Psychol, 2005. 96(Pt 4): pp. 505-24. 


[PDF page 307]

86. 
87. 
88. 
89, 
90. 
oun 
Yi. 
23) 
94, 
OS: 
96. 
On: 
98. 
Sh8 
NOTES 295 
Blinkhorn, S., ‘Intelligence: a gender bender’. Nature, 2005. 438(7064): 
pp. 31-2. 
Direkvand-Moghadam, A., et al., ‘Epidemiology of Premenstrual 
Syndrome (PMS)-A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Study’. ] Clin 
Diagn Res, 2014. 8(2): pp. 106-9. 
Romans, S., et al., ‘Mood and the menstrual cycle: a review of 
ptospective data studies’. Gend Med, 2012. 9(5): pp. 361-84. 
Romans, S.E., et al., ‘Mood and the menstrual cycle’. Psychother 
Psychosom, 2013. 82(1): pp. 53-60. 
Ussher, J., “The myth of premenstrual moodiness’, in The 
Conversation. 2012. 
Kulkarni, J., “PMS is real and denying its existence harms women’, in 
The Conversation. 2012. 
Gehlert, S., et al., ‘The prevalence of premenstruai dysphoric disorder 
in a randomly selected group of urban and rural women’. Psycho/ Med, 
2009. 39(1): pp. 129-36. 
Comasco, E. and I. Sundstrom-Poromaa, ‘Neuroimaging the 
Menstrual Cycle and Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder’. Curr Psychiatry 
Rep, 2015. 17(10): p. 77. 
Romans, S.E., et al., ‘Crying, oral contraceptive use and the menstrual 
cycle’. | Affect Disord, 2017. 208: pp. 272-7. 
Skovlund, C.\W., et al., ‘Association of Hormonal Contraception With 
Depression’. LAMA Psychiatry, 2016. 73(11): pp. 1154-62. 
Wise, ]., ‘Hormonal contraception use among teenagers linked to 
depression’, BMJ, 2016. 354: p. 15289. 
Zethraeus, N., et al., ‘A first-choice combined oral contraceptive 
influences general well-being in healthy women: a double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial’. Ferti/ Steri/, 2017. 107(5): 
pp. 1238-45. 
Iversen, L., et al., ‘Lifetime cancer risk and combined oral 
contraceptives: the Royal College of General Practitioners’ Oral 
Contraception Study’, Am J Obstet Gynecol, 2017. 
Pletzer, B.A. and H.H. Kerschbaum, ‘50 years of hormonal contraception 
—time to find out, what it does to our brain’. Front Neurosci, 2014. 8: p. 256. 
CHAPTER 5: THE TEENAGE BRAIN 
100. Choudhuty, S., K.A. McKinney and M. Merten, ‘Rebelling against 
the brain: public engagement with the “neurological adolescent”. 
Soe Sct Med, 2012. 74(4): pp. 565-73. 


[PDF page 308]

296 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
Te 
iP 
114. 
115; 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Walhovd, K.B., et al., “Through Thick and Thin: a Need to 
Reconcile Contradictory Results on Trajectories in Human Cortical 
Development’. Cereb Cortex; 2017. 27(2): pp. 1472-81. 
Giedd, J.N., ‘The amazing teen brain’. Scientific American, 2015 (June). 
Peper, J.S., et al., ‘Sex steroids and brain structure in pubertal boys and 
girls: a mini-review of neuroimaging studies’. Newroscience, 2011. 191: 
pp. 28-37. 
Ladouceur, C.D., et al., ‘White matter development in adolescence: the 
influence of puberty and implications for affective disorders’. Dev Cogn 
Neurosci, 2012. 2(1): pp. 36—54. 
Damour, L., Untangled: Guiding Teenage Girls through the Seven Transitions 
into Adulthood. 2016, New York: Penguin Random House. 
Cooke. K., Girl Stuff: A full-on guide to the teen years. 2013, Australia: 
Penguin Random House. 
Purdue University, ‘Pain of ostracism can be deep, long-lasting’. 2011, 
ScienceDaily, 6 June 2011. 
Sebastian, C.L., et al., ‘Developmental influences on the neural bases 
of responses to social rejection: implications of social neuroscience for 
education’. Neuroimage, 2011. 57(3): pp. 686—94. 
Berns, G.S., et al., ‘Neural mechanisms of the influence of popularity 
on adolescent ratings of music’. Neuroimage, 2010. 49(3): pp. 2687-96. 
Eisenberger, N.I., “The pain of social disconnection: examining the 
shared neural underpinnings of physical and social pain’. Naf Rev 
Neurosci, 2012. 13(6): pp. 421-34. 
Dewall, C.N., et al., ‘Acetaminophen reduces social pain: behavioral 
and neural evidence’. Psycho/ Sci, 2010. 21(7): pp. 931-7. 
Stephanou, K., et al., “Hard to look on the bright side: Neural 
correlates of impaired emotion regulation in depressed youth’. Soc Cogn 
Affect Neurosci, 2017. 
Guyer, A.E., J.S. Silk and E.E. Nelson, “The neurobiology of the 
emotional adolescent: From the inside out’. Newrosci Biobehav Rev, 2016. 
70: pp. 74-85. 
Poulton, R., TE. Moffitt and P.A. Silva, ‘The Dunedin 
Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study: overview of the first 
40 years, with an eye to the future’. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol, 
2015. 50(5): pp. 679-93. 
Nelson, J.A., “The power of stereotyping and confirmation bias to 
overwhelm accurate assessment: the case of economics, gender, and 
tisk aversion’. Journal of Economic Methodology, 2014. 21(3): pp. 211-31. 


[PDF page 309]

116. 
Uy. 
118. 
119) 
NOTES 297 
Fine, C., Testosterone Rex: Unmaking the Myths of Our Gendered Minds. 2017, 
Sydney: Icon Boks. 
Somerville, L.H., ‘Special issue on the teenage brain: Sensitivity to 
social evaluation’, Curr Dir Psychol Sci, 2013. 22(2): pp. 121-7. 
Gardner, M. and L. Steinberg, ‘Peer influence on risk taking, risk 
preference, and risky decision making in adolescence and adulthood: 
an experimental study’. Dev Psychol, 2005. 41(4): pp. 625-35. 
Blakemore, S.J., ‘Adolescent brain development’, M. Costandi, Editor. 
2014, The Wellcome Trust. 
CHAPTER 6: DEPRESSION AND ANXIETY 
120. 
Wale 
ize, 
123, 
124. 
EZ. 
126; 
27; 
128. 
129; 
130. 
ikeitt 
Lewinsohn, P.M., et al., ‘Separation anxiety disorder in childhood as a 
risk factor for future mental illness’. | Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 
2008. 47(5): pp. 548-55. 
North, B., M. Gross and S. Smith, ‘Study confirms HSC exams source 
of major stress to adolescents’. 2015, The Conversation. 
Kuehner, C., ‘Why 1s depression more common among women than 
among mene’. Lancet Psychiatry, 2016. 4(2): pp. 146-58. 
Solomon, A., ‘Depression: the secret we share’. 2013, TED Talk. 
beyondblue. ‘beyondblue: the facts. 2017 [cited 2017; Available from: https:// 
www.beyondblue.org.au/the-facts]. 
Craske, M.G., et al., ‘Anxiety disorders’, Nat Rev Dis Primers, 2017. 3: 
p. 17024. 
beyondblue, “Types of Anxiety: PTSD’. 2017. 
Schaefer, J.D., et al., ‘Enduring mental health: Prevalence and 
prediction’. | Abnorm Psychol, 2017. 126(2): pp. 212-24. 
beyondblue. “Youth beyondblue: stats and facts’. 2017; Available from: https: Hy) 
www.youthbeyondblue.com/ footer/stats-and-facts. 
Schmaal, L., et al., ‘Subcortical brain alterations in major depressive 
disorder: findings from the ENIGMA Major Depressive Disorder 
working group’. Mo/ Psychiatry, 2016. 21(6): pp. 806-12. 
Anthes, E., ‘Depression: A change of mind’, Nature, 2014. 515(7526): 
pp. 185-7. 
Jorm, A.F,, et al., ‘A guide to what works for depression’. 2013, 
beyondb/ue: Melbourne. 
Gressier, F., R. Calati and A. Serretti, ‘S-HTTLPR and gender 
differences in affective disorders: A systematic review’. ] Affect Disord, 
2016. 190: pp. 193-207. 


[PDF page 310]

298 
ee 
134, 
135; 
136. 
Nei 
138: 
iS 9) 
140. 
141. 
142. 
143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Caspi, A,, et al., ‘Moderation of the effect of adolescent-onset 
cannabis use on adult psychosis by a functional polymorphism in the 
catechol-O-methyltransferase gene: longitudinal evidence of a gene x 
environment interaction’, Bzo/ Psychiatry, 2005. 57(10): pp. 1117-27. 
Belsky, J. and M. Pluess, ‘Beyond diathesis stress: differential 
susceptibility to environmental influences’. Psycho/ Bull, 2009. 135(6): 
pp. 885-908. 
Caspi, A., et al., “Genetic sensitivity to the environment: the case of the 
serotonin transporter gene and its implications for studying complex 
diseases and traits’. Am J Psychiatry, 2010. 167(5): pp. 509-27. 
Culverhouse, R.C., et al., ‘Collaborative meta-analysis finds no evidence 
of a strong interaction between stress and 5-HTTLPR genotype 
contributing to the development of depression’. Mo/ Psychiatry, 2017. 
Riecher-Rossler, A., ‘Sex and gender differences in mental disorders’, 
Lancet Psychiatry, 2017. 4(1): pp. 8-9. 
Kulkarni, iP ‘Hormones actually a great protector of women’s health’. 
2011, The Conversation. 
Li, S.H. and B.M. Graham, ‘Why are women so vulnerable to anxiety, 
trauma-related and stress-related disorders? The potential role of sex 
hormones’. Lancet Psychiatry, 2017. 4(1): pp. 73-82. 
Merz, C.J. and O.T. Wolf, ‘Sex differences in stress effects on 
emotional learning’. J Neurosci Res, 2017. 95(1—2): pp. 93-105. 
Bryant, R.A., et al., ‘The association between menstrual cycle and 
traumatic memories’. ] Affect Disord, 2011. 131(1-3): pp. 398-401. 
Ferree, N. K., M. Wheeler and L. Cahill, ‘The influence of emergency 
contraception on post-traumatic stress symptoms following sexual 
assault’. | Forensic Nurs, 2012. 8(3): pp. 122-30. 
Mordecai, K.L., et al., ‘Cortisol reactivity and emotional memory after 
psychosocial stress in oral contraceptive users’. ] Newrosci Res, 2017. 
95(1—2): pp. 126-35. 
Oldehinkel, A. J. & E.M. Bouma, ‘Sensitivity to the depressogenic 
effect of stress and HPA-axis reactivity in adolescence: a review of 
gender differences’. Neurosci Biobehav, 2011. 35(8): pp. 1757-70. 
Dantzer, R. and K.W. Kelley, “Twenty years of research on cytokine- 
induced sickness behavior’. Brain Behav Immun, 2007. 21(2): pp. 153-60. 
Raison, C.L., et al., ‘A randomized controlled trial of the tumor 
necrosis factor antagonist infliximab for treatment-resistant depression: 
the role of baseline inflammatory biomarkers’. }4M_A Psychiatry, 2013. 
70(1): pp. 31-41. 


[PDF page 311]

147. 
148. 
149, 
150. 
NOTES 299 
Pariante, C. M., “Why are depressed patients inflamed? A reflection 
on 20 years of research on depression, glucocorticoid resistance and 
inflammation’. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol, 2017. 27(6): pp. 554-9. 
World Health Organization and London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, ‘Preventing intimate partner and sexual violence 
against women. Taking action and generating evidence’. 2010. 
Chen, Y-Y., et al., “Women’s status and depressive symptoms: a 
multilevel analysis’. Soc Sc¢ Med, 2005. 60(1): pp. 49-60. 
Van de Velde, S., et al., ‘Macro-level gender equality and depression in 
men and women in Europe’. Socio/ Health I//n, 2013. 35(5): pp. 682-98. 
CHAPTER 7: SEX, LOVE AND NEUROBIOLOGY 
Asie 
156. 
157: 
158. 
160. 
161. 
Suleiman, A.B., et al., ‘Becoming a sexual being: The “elephant in the 
room” of adolescent brain development’. Dev Cogn Neurosci, 2017. 25: 
pp. 209-20. 
Wedekind, C., et al., ‘MHC-dependent mate preferences in humans’, 
Proce Biol Sci, 1995. 260(1359): pp. 245-9. 
Ober, C., ‘HLA and fertility’, Am ] Hum Genet, 1995. 57(5): pp. 1242-3. 
Durante, K.M., et al., ‘Ovulation leads women to perceive sexy cads as 
good dads’. J Pers Soc Psychol, 2012. 103(2): pp. 292-305. 
Brooks, R., ‘Round 2: Ovulatory Cycles and Shifting Preferences’. 
2014, The Conversation. 
Roney, J.R. and Z.L. Simmons, ‘Hormonal predictors of sexual 
motivation in natural menstrual cycles’. Horm Behav, 2013. 63(4): 
pp- 636-45. 
Dennerstein, L., et al., ‘Hormones, mood, sexuality, and the 
menopausal transition’. Ferti/ Steri/, 2002. 77 Suppl 4: pp. $42—8. 
Pastor, Z., K. Holla, and R. Chmel, “The influence of combined oral 
contraceptives on female sexual desire: a systematic review’. Eur J 
Contracept Reprod Health Care, 2013. 18(1): pp. 27-43. 
Meston, C.M. and D.M. Buss, ‘Why humans have sex’. Arch Sex Behav, 
2007. 36(4): pp. 477-507. 
Whipple, B. and K. Brash-McGteer, ‘Management of female sexual 
dysfunction’, in Sexual function in people with disability and chronic illness: a 
health professional’s guide, M.L. Sipski and C.J. Alexander, Editors. 1997, 
Gaithersburg: Aspen. 
‘What you need to know. Female Sexual Response.’, in http://www. 
athp.org/Publications-and-Resoutces, A.o.R.H. Professionals. Editor. 
2008. 


[PDF page 312]

300 
162. 
163. 
164. 
165. 
166. 
167. 
168. 
169. 
170. 
ibys. 
IER 
LS, 
174. 
175: 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Basson, R., ‘Female sexual response: the role of drugs in the 
management of sexual dysfunction’. Obstet Gyneco/, 2001. 98(2): 
pp. 350-3. 
Nagoski, E., Come as You Are: the surprising new science that will transform 
your sex life. 2015, New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Georgiadis, J.R., M.L. Kringelbach and J.G. Pfaus, ‘Sex for fun: a 
synthesis of human and animal neurobiology’. Naf Rev Uro/, 2012. 9(9): 
pp. 486-98. 
Goldstein, I., et al., ‘Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder: 
International Society for the Study of Women’s Sexual Health 
(ISSWSH) Expert Consensus Panel Review’. Mayo Clin Proc, 2017. 
92(1): pp. 114-128. 
Kingsberg, S.A., A.H. Clayton, and J.G. Pfaus, ‘The Female Sexual 
Response: Current Models, Neurobiological Underpinnings and 
Agents Currently Approved or Under Investigation for the Treatment 
of Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder’. CNS Drugs, 2015. 29(11): 
pp. 915-33. 
Lucke, J., ‘Weekly Dose: flibanserin, the drug that gives women one 
extra sexually satisfying experience every two months’. 2016: The 
Conversation. 
‘Female Sex Drive’, in Catalyst, D.J. Newby, Editor. 2015, ABC. 
Basson, R., “Testosterone therapy for reduced libido in women’. Ther 
Aldv Endocrinol Metab, 2010. 1(4): pp. 155-64. 
University of Melbourne, ‘Menopause dashes sex life’. 2002, 
Melbourne: Eureka Alert. 
Bergner, D., What Do Women Want?: Adventures in the Science of Female 
Desire. 2014, New York: HarperCollins. 
Perel, E., Mating in Captivity: Sex, Lies and Domestic Bliss. 2007, London: 
Hodder & Stoughton 
Dickson, N., et al., ‘Stability and change in same-sex attraction, 
experience, and identity by sex and age in a New Zealand birth cohort’. 
Arch Sex Behav, 2013. 42(5): pp. 753-63. 
Chantry, K. “The transgender bathroom contoversy: four essential 
reads’. 2017 [cited 2017 March 4th]; Available from: https:// 
theconversation.com/the-transgender-bathroom-controversy-four- 
essential-reads-72635. 
Fusion. ‘Massive Millennial Poll’. 2015; Available from: http://fusion. 
net/story/42216/half-of-young-people-believe-gender-isnt-limited-to- 
male-and-female/. 


[PDF page 313]

176. 
178. 
17. 
180. 
181, 
182. 
183. 
184. 
185. 
186. 
187. 
188, 
189. 
NOTES 301 
Zeki, S. and J.P. Romaya, “The brain reaction to viewing faces of 
opposite- and same-sex romantic partners’. PLoS One, 2010. 5(12): 
p. e15802. 
Meston, C.M., R.J. Levin, M.L. Sipski, E.M. Hull and J.R. Heiman, 
“Women’s Orgasm’. Annu Rev Sex Res, 2004. 15(1): pp. 173-257. 
O’Connell, H.E., K.V. Sanjeevan, and J.M. Hutson, ‘Anatomy of the 
clitoris’. | Uro/, 2005. 174(4 Pt 1): pp. 1189-95. 
Sample, I., ‘Female orgasm captured in series of brain scans’, in The 
Guardian. 2011. 
Kontula, O. and A. Miettinen, ‘Determinants of female sexual 
orgasms’. Socioaffect Neurosci Psychol, 2016. 6: p. 31624. 
Coria-Avila, G.A., et al., “The role of orgasm in the development and 
shaping of partner preferences’. Socioaffect Neurosci Psychol, 2016. 6: 
p. 31815. 
King, R., M. Dempsey and K.A. Valentine, ‘Measuring sperm 
backflow following female orgasm: a new method’. Socioaffect Neurosci 
Psychol, 2016. 6: p. 31927. 
Earp, B.D., et al., “Addicted to love: What is love addiction and when 
should it be treated?’. Philos Psychiatr Psychol, 2017. 24(1): pp. 77-92. 
Fisher, H.E., et al., ‘Intense, Passionate, Romantic Love: A Natural 
Addiction? How the Fields That Investigate Romance and Substance 
Abuse Can Inform Each Other’. Front Psycho/, 2016. 7: p. 687. 
Acevedo, B.P., et al., ‘Neural correlates of long-term intense romantic 
love’. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci, 2012. 7(2): pp. 145-59. 
Carter, C.S. and SW. Porges, “The biochemistry of love: an oxytocin 
hypothesis’. EMBO reports, 2013. 14(1). 
Pedersen, C.A. and A.J. Prange, Jr., ‘Induction of maternal behavior 
in virgin rats after intracerebroventricular administration of oxytocin’. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U $_A, 1979. 76(12): pp. 6661-5. 
Chutchland, P.S. and P. Winkielman, ‘Modulating social behavior with 
oxytocin: how does it work? What does it mean?’. Horm Behav, 2012. 
61(3): pp. 392-9. 
Patoine, B., ‘One Molecule for Love, Trust, and Morality? Separating 
Hype from Hope in the Oxytocin Research Explosion’. 2013: The 
Dana Foundation. 
McGonigal, K., ‘How to make stress your friend’. 2013, TED Talk. 
Kosfeld, M., et al., ‘Oxytocin increases trust in humans’. Nature, 2005. 
435(7042): pp. 673-6. 
Damasio, A., ‘Brain Trust’. Nature, 2005. 435(2 June): pp. 571-2. 


[PDF page 314]

302 
193. 
194, 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Kemp, A.H. and A. Gustella, “The dark side of the love drug — 
oxytocin linked to gloating, envy and aggression’. 2011: The 
Conversation. 
Shen, H., ‘Neuroscience: The hard science of oxytocin’. Nature, 2015. 
522(7557): pp. 410-12. 
CHAPTER 8: PREGNANCY AND MOTHERHOOD 
195. 
196, 
197. 
198. 
199. 
200. 
201. 
202. 
209, 
204. 
205. 
206. 
Hoekzema, E., et al., ‘Pregnancy leads to long-lasting changes in 
human brain structure’. Nat Neurosci, 2017. 20(2): pp. 287-96. 
Pereira, M. and A. Ferreira, ‘Neuroanatomical and neurochemical basis 
of parenting: Dynamic coordination of motivational, affective and 
cognitive processes’. Hormones and Behavior, 2016. (77): pp. 72-85. 
Levy, F., G. Gheusi and M. Keller, ‘Plasticity of the parental brain: a 
case for neurogenesis’. | Neuroendocrinol, 2011. 23(11): pp. 984-93. 
Hrdy, S.B., “Variable postpartum responsiveness among humans 
and other primates with “cooperative breeding”: A comparative and 
evolutionary perspective’. Horm Behav, 2016. 77: pp. 272-83. 
Brunton, P.J. and J.A. Russell, “The expectant brain: adapting for 
motherhood’. Nat Rev Neurosci, 2008. 9(1): pp. 11-25. 
Russell, J.A., A.J. Douglas and C.D. Ingram, ‘Brain preparations 
for maternity — adaptive changes in behavioral and neuroendocrine 
systems during pregnancy and lactation. An overview’. Prog Brain Res, 
2001. 133: pp. 1-38. 
Grattan, D.R. and I.C. Kokay, ‘Prolactin: a pleiotropic neuroendocrine 
hormone’, ] Newroendocrino/, 2008. 20(6): pp. 752-63. 
Grattan, D.R., ‘60 years of neuroendocrinology: The hypothalamo- 
prolactin axis’. | Endocrinol, 2015. 226(2): pp. T101-22. 
NICE, “NICE public health guidance 27: Weight management before, 
during and after pregnancy’. 2010, National Institute for Health and 
Clinical Excellence: London. 
Committee to Reexamine Institute of Medicine Pregnancy Weight 
Guidelines, “Weight gain during pregnancy: reexamining the 
guidelines’. 2009, National Academies Press, Washington DC. 
de Jersey, SJ., et al., ‘A prospective study of pregnancy weight gain in 
Australian women’, Aust NZ J Obstet Gynaecol, 2012. 52(6): pp. 545-51. 
Torner, L., et al., ‘Anxiolytic and anti-stress effects of brain prolactin: 
improved efficacy of antisense targeting of the prolactin receptor by 
molecular modeling’. J Newrosci, 2001. 21(9): pp. 3207-14. 


[PDF page 315]

208. 
210. 
PAGE 
216. 
PATE 
2A 
Pave) 
220. 
Vea: 
NOTES 303 
Gustafson, P., S.J. Bunn and D.R. Grattan, “The role of prolactin in the 
suppression of Crh mRNA expression during pregnancy and Jactation 
in the mouse’. | Newroendocrinol, 2017. 29(9). 
Buckwalter, J.G., D.K. Buckwalter, B.W. Bluestein and F.Z. Stanczyk, 
‘Pregnancy and postpartum: changes in cognition and mood’, in The 
Maternal Brain. Progress in Brain Research. 2001, Elsevier. 
Logan, D.M., K.R. Hill et al., ‘How do memory and attention change 
with pregnancy and childbirth? A controlled longitudinal examination 
of neuropsychological functioning in pregnant and postpartum 
women’. Cin Exp Neuropsychol. 36(5): pp.528—39. 
Christensen, H., C. Poyser, P. Pollitt and J. Cubis, ‘Pregnancy may 
confer a selective cognitive advantage’. Journal of Reproductive and Infant 
Psychology, 1999. 17(1): pp. 7-25. 
Casey, P., ‘A longitudinal study of cognitive performance during 
pregnancy and new motherhood’. Archives of Women’s Mental Health, 
2000. 3(2): pp. 65-76. 
Ellison, K., The Mommy Brain: How Motherhood Makes Us Smarter. 2005, 
New York: Basic Books. 
Stern D.N. and N. Bruschweiler-Stern, The Birth Of A Mother: How The 
Motherhood Experience Changes You Forever. 1998, New York: Basic Books. 
Kim, P., L. Strathearn and J.E. Swain, “The maternal brain and its 
plasticity in humans’. Horm Behav, 2016. 77: pp. 113-23. 
Moore, E.R., et al., ‘Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and 
their healthy newborn infants’. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2016. 11: 
p. CD003519. 
Rosenblatt, J.S., ‘Nonhormonal basis of maternal behavior in the rat’. 
Science 1967. 156(3781): pp. 1512-14. 
Lingle, S. and T. Riede, “Deer Mothers are Sensitive to Infant Distress 
Vocalizations of Diverse Mammalian Species’. The American Naturahst, 
2014. 1844): pp. 510-522. 
Feldman, R., ‘The neurobiology of mammalian parenting and the 
biosocial context of human caregiving’. Horm Behav, 2016. 77: pp. 3-17. 
Gordon, L., et al., ‘Testosterone, oxytocin, and the development of 
human parental care’. Horm Behav, 2017. 93: pp. 184-192. 
Krol, K.M., et al., ‘Breastfeeding experience differentially impacts 
recognition of happiness and anger in mothers’. Sv Rep, 2014. 4: 
p. 7006. 
Hahn-Holbrook, J., et al, ‘Maternal defense: breast feeding increases 
aggression by reducing stress’. Psychol Sez, 2011. 22(10): pp. 1288-1295. 


[PDF page 316]

304 
222: 
223. 
224. 
2ERDY 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Donato, J., Jr. and R. Frazao, ‘Interactions between prolactin and 
kisspeptin to control reproduction’. Arch Endocrinol Metab, 2016. 60(6): 
pp. 587-95. 
Patton, C.C., ‘Prediction of perinatal depression from adolescence and 
before conception (VIHCS): 20-year prospective cohort study’. Lancer, 
2015. 386(9996): pp. 875-883. 
Loxton, D. and J. Lucke, ‘Reproductive health: Findings from the 
Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health’. 2009: Australian 
Government Department of Health. 
Weaver, J.J. and J.M. Ussher, ‘How motherhood changes life — a 
discourse analytic study with mothers of young children’. Journal of 
Reproductive and Infant Psychology, 2007. 15(1): pp. 51-68. 
CHAPTER 9: MENOPAUSE 
226. 
22 
228. 
229: 
DOU: 
2k 
DV 
253. 
234. 
20% 
2306. 
Cooke, K., Women’s Stuff. 2011, London: Penguin Random House. 
Campbell K.E., et al., “The trajectory of negative mood and depressive 
symptoms over two decades’. Maturitas, 2017. 95: pp. 36—41. 
Brinton, R.D., et al., ‘Perimenopause as a neurological transition state’. 
Nat Rev Endocrino/, 2015. 11(7): pp. 393-405. 
Brent, L.J., et al., ‘Ecological knowledge, leadership, and the evolution 
of menopause in killer whales’. Curr Bio/, 2015. 25(6): pp. 746-50. 
Rettberg, J.R., J. Yao and R.D. Brinton, ‘Estrogen: a master regulator 
of bioenergetic systems in the brain and body’. Front Neuroendocrinol, 
2014. 35(1): pp. 8-30. 
Freedman, R.R., ‘Menopausal hot flashes: mechanisms, endocrinology, 
treatment’. | Steroid Biochem Mol Biol, 2014. 142: pp. 115-20. 
Hardy, J.D. and E.F. Du Bois, ‘Differences between Men and Women 
in Their Response to Heat and Cold’. Proc Nat/ Acad Sci USA, 1940. 
26(6): pp. 389-98. 
Charkoudian, N. and N.S. Stachenfeld, ‘Reproductive hormone influences 
on thermoregulation in women’, Compr Physiol, 2014. 4(2): pp. 793-804. 
Prague, J.K., et al, ‘Neurokinin 3 receptor antagonism as a novel 
treatment for menopausal hot flushes: a phase 2, randomised, double- 
blind, placebo-controlled trial’, Lancer, 2017. 389(10081): pp. 1809-1820. 
Freedman, R.R., et al., ‘Cortical activation during menopausal hot 
flashes’, Ferti/ Steril, 2006. 85(3): pp. 674-8. 
Berecki-Gisolf, J., N. Begum and A.J. Dobson, ‘Symptoms reported by 
women in midlife: menopausal transition or aging?’. Menopause, 2009. 
16(5): pp. 1021-9, 


[PDF page 317]

Zon: 
240. 
241. 
246. 
247, 
248. 
252, 
NOTES 305 
Ciano, C., et al., ‘Longitudinal Study of Insomnia Symptoms Among 
Women During Perimenopause’. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs, 2017. 
46(6): pp. 804-13. 
Grandner, M.A., ‘Sleep, Health, and Society’. Seep Med Chin, 2017. 12(1): 
pp. 1-22. 
Mong, J.A. and D.M. Cusmano, ‘Sex differences in sleep: impact of 
biological sex and sex steroids’. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, 2016. 
371(1688): p. 20150110. 
Allmen, T., Menopause Confidential. A Doctor Reveals the Secrets to Thriving 
Through Midlife. 2016, New York: HarperCollins. 
Gervais, N.J., J.A. Mong and A. Lacreuse, ‘Ovarian hormones, 
sleep and cognition across the adult female lifespan: An integrated 
perspective’. Front Neuroendocrinol, 2017. 47: pp. 134-53. 
Adan, A. and V. Natale, ‘Gender differences in morningness- 
eveningness preference’. Chronobiol Int, 2002. 19(4): pp. 709-20. 
Baker, F.C., et al., ‘Insomnia in women approaching menopause: 
Beyond perception’. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2015. 60: pp. 96-104. 
de Zambotti, M., et al., ‘Magnitude of the impact of hot flashes on sleep 
in perimenopausal women’. Feriz/ Steri/, 2014. 102(6): pp. 1708-15 el. 
Kulkarni, J., “There’s no “rushing women’s syndrome” but hormones 
affect mental health’. 2014, The Conversation. 
Campbell, K.E., et al., ‘Impact of menopausal status on negative mood 
and depressive symptoms in a longitudinal sample spanning 20 years’. 
Menopause, 2017. 24(5): pp. 490-6. 
Weber, M.T., P.M. Maki and M.P. McDermott, ‘Cognition and mood 1n 
petimenopause: a systematic review arid meta-analysis’. J Steroid Biochem 
Mo/ Biol, 2014. 142: pp. 90-8. 
Alzheimer’s Australia. ‘About demenita and memory loss’. Accessed 
2017; Available from: https:// www. fightdementia.org.au/about- 
dementia/memory-loss/memory-changes. 
The Jean Hailes Foundation, ‘Menopause Management’. 2017. 
Pinkerton, J.V., ‘Changing the conversation about hormone therapy’. 
Menopause, 2017. 24(9): pp. 991-3. 
The North American Menopause Society, ‘The 2017 hormone therapy 
position statement of The North American Menopause Society’. 
Menopause, 2017. 24(7): pp. 728-53. 
Wilson, R.A. and T.A. Wilson, “The Basic Philosophy of Estrogen 
Maintenance’. The Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 1972. 20(11): 
pp. 521-523. 


[PDF page 318]

306 
258; 
254. 
205. 
256. 
257: 
258. 
259. 
260. 
261. 
262. 
263. 
264. 
265. 
266. 
267. 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Hersh, A.L., M.L. Stefanick and R.S. Stafford, ‘National use of 
postmenopausal hormone therapy: annual trends and response to 
recent evidence’. JAMA, 2004. 291(1): pp. 47-53. 
WHI. Available from: http://www.whi.org/. 
Million Women Study; Available from: http://www. 
millionwomenstudy.org/. 
Nurses’ Health Study, Available from: http://www.nurseshealthstudy. 
ore /. 
‘Effects of estrogen or estrogen/progestin regimens on heart 
disease risk factors in postmenopausal women. The Postmenopausal 
Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) Trial. The Writing Group 
for the PEPI Trial’, LAMA, 1995. 273(3): pp. 199-208. 
‘Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN)’. Available from: 
http://www.swanstudy.org /. 
Shumaker, S.A., et al., “Estrogen plus progestin and the incidence of 
dementia and mild cognitive impairment in postmenopausal women: 
the Women’s Health Initiative Memory Study: a randomized controlled 
trial’. JAMA, 2003. 289: pp. 2651-62. 
Million Women Study, C., “Breast cancer and hormone-replacement 
therapy in the Million Women Study’, Lancet, 2003. 362(9382): pp. 419-27. 
Cancer Council Australia. ‘Breast Cancer’. 2017; Available from: http:// 
www.cancer.org.au/about-cancer/types-of-cancer/breast-cancer/. 
Barbieri, R.L., ‘Patient education: Menopausal hormone therapy 
(Beyond the Basics)’, K.A. Martin, Editor. 2017; UpToDate. 
Cintron, D., et al., “Efficacy of menopausal hormone therapy on sleep 
quality: systematic review and meta-analysis’. Endocrine, 2017. 55(3): 
pp. 702-11. 
Martin, K.A. and R.L. Barbieri, “Treatment of menopausal symptoms 
with hormone therapy’, in UpToDate, K.A. Martin, Editor. 2017. 
Davison, S.L., et al., “Testosterone improves verbal learning and 
memory in postmenopausal women: Results from a pilot study’, 
Maturitas, 2011. 70(3): pp. 307-11. 
Manson, J.E., et al., ‘Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Long- 
term All-Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality: The Women’s Health 
Initiative Randomized Trials’. JAMA, 2017. 318(10): pp. 927-38. 
MacLennan, A.H., VW. Henderson, B,J. Paine, J. Mathias, E.N. 
Ramsay, P. Ryan, N.P. Stocks and A.W. Taylor, ‘Hormone therapy, 
timing of initiation, and cognition in women aged older than 60 years: 
the REMEMBER pilot study’. Menopause, 2006. 13: pp. 28-36. 


[PDF page 319]

268. 
269. 
NOTES 307 
Daniel, J.M., C.F. Witty and S.P. Rodgers, ‘Long-term consequences 
of estrogens administered in midlife on female cognitive aging’. Horm 
Behav, 2015. 74: pp. 77-85. 
Jung, C.G., Modern man in search of a soul. 1933, New York, NY: 
Harcourt, Brace & World. 
CHAPTER 10: THE AGEING BRAIN 
270. 
le 
274. 
Ape 
278. 
PS 
280. 
281. 
Pew Research Center, ‘Growing Old in America: Expectations vs. 
Reality’. 2009. 
Jeune, B., JM. Robine, R. Young, B. Desjardins, A. Skytthe and JW. 
Vaupel, ‘Jeanne Calment and her successors. Biographical notes on 
the longest living humans’, in Swpercentenarians, H. Maier, Editor. 2010, 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. 
Buettner, D. “5 Easy Steps to “Blue Zone” Your 2017’. 2017; Available 
from: https://bluezones.com/2017/01/blue-zone-2017/. 
Ritchie, K., ‘Mental status examination of an exceptional case 
of longevity J. C. aged 118 years’. Br ] Psychiatry, 1995. 166(2): 
pp. 229-35. 
Evert, J., et al., “Morbidity profiles of centenarians: survivors, 
delayers, and escapers’. | Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci, 2003. 58(3): 
pp. 232-7. 
Settersten Jr, R.A., ‘Relationships in Time and the Life Course: The 
Significance of Linked Lives’. Research in Human Development, 2015. 
12(3—4): pp. 217-23. 
Mather, M., ‘The emotion paradox in the aging brain’. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences, 2012. 1251(1): pp. 33-49. 
Belsky, DW., A. Caspi, et al., ‘Impact of early personal — history 
characteristics on the Pace of Aging: implications for clinical trials of 
therapies to slow aging and extend healthspan’. Aging Cell, 2017. 16(4): 
pp. 644-51. 
Okinawan Centenarian Study, ‘Okinawa Centenarian Study’. 2017; 
Available from: http://www.okicent.org/. 
NECS. ‘Why Study Centenarians? An Overview’. New England 
Centenarian Study. 2017 [cited 21 October 2017]. 
Perls, T.F. and R. Fretts, ‘Why Women Live Longer than Men’. Sct Am, 
1998. 
Ostan, R., et al., ‘Gender, aging and longevity in humans: an update of 
an intriguing/neglected scenario paving the way to a gender-specific 
medicine’. Clin Sci (Lond), 2016. 130(19): pp. 1711-25. 


[PDF page 320]

308 
282. 
283. 
284. 
285. 
286. 
287. 
288. 
289. 
290. 
Boi 
292. 
Boo 
294. 
PALS 
THE WOMEN’S BRAIN BOOK 
Camus, M.F., D.J. Clancy and D.K. Dowling, ‘Mitochondria, maternal 
inheritance, and male aging’. Curr Bio/, 2012. 22(18): pp. 1717-21. 
Sun, F., et al., ‘Extended maternal age at birth of last child and 
women’s longevity in the Long Life Family Study’. Menopause, 2015. 
22(1): pp. 26-31. 
Barclay, Keenan, K., E. Grundy, M. Kolk and M. Myrskyla, 
‘Reproductive history and post-reproductive mortality: A sibling 
comparison analysis using Swedish register data’. Social Science ¢* 
Medicine, 2016. 155: pp. 82-92. 
Grundy, E. and O. Kravdal, ‘Do short birth intervals have long-term 
implications for parental health? Results from analyses of complete 
cohort Norwegian register data’. | Epidemiol Community Health, 2014. 
68(10): pp. 958-64. 
Boston University Medical Center, ‘Reproduction later in life is a 
marker for longevity in women’, 2014, Eurek Alert! 
Neu, S.C., et al., ‘Apolipoprotein E Genotype and Sex Risk Factors 
for Alzheimer Disease: A Meta-analysis’. LAMA Neurol, 2017. 74(10): 
pp. 1178-89. 
Alzheimer’s Association, ‘2017 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures’. 
2017, Alzheimers Dement, pp. 325-73. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Causes of Death, Australia, 2016’. 2017: 
Canberra. 
Prince. M., A. Wimo, M. Guerchet, et al., on behalf of Alzheimer’s 
Disease International (ADI). “The World Alzheimer Report 2015, The 
Global Impact of Dementia: An analysis of prevalence, incidence, cost 
and trends’. 2015, London. 
World Health Organization. First WHO ministerial conference on 
global action against dementia: meeting report. 2015, Switzerland. 
Xu, W., et al., ‘Meta-analysis of modifiable risk factors for 
Alzheimer’s disease’. ] Newro/ Neurosurg Psychiatry, 2015. 86(12): 
pp- 1299-306. 
Dementia Australia. ‘About Dementia’. 2017 [cited September 2017]; 
Available from: https://www. dementia.org.au/in formation /about- 
dementia. 
Irish, M., et al., ‘Investigating the enhancing effect of music on 
autobiographical memory in mild Alzheimer’s disease’. Dement Geriatr 
Cogn Disord, 2006. 22(1): pp. 108-20. 
Buckley, R.L. and Y.Y. Lim, ‘What causes Alzheimer’s disease? What 
we know, don’t know and suspect’, 2017; Available from: https:// 


[PDF page 321]

296. 
AOR 
298. 
29) 
300. 
SOF 
302. 
303. 
304. 
305. 
306. 
307. 
308. 
NOTES 309 
theconversation.com/what-causes-alzheimers-disease-what-we-know- 
dont-know-and-suspect-75847. 
van Dellen, A., C. Blakemore, R. Deacon, D. York and A.J. Hannan, 
‘Delaying the onset of Huntington’s in mice’. Nature, 2000. 404(6779): 
pp. 721-2. 
Fisher, G.G., et al., ‘Mental work demands, retirement, and 
longitudinal trajectories of cognitive functioning’, ] Oaup Health Psychol, 
2014. 19(2): pp. 231-42. 
Stern, Y., ‘Build Your Cognitive Reserve: An Interview with 
Dr. Yaakov Stern’, in The SharpBrains Guide to Brain Fitness, A. Fernandez 
and E. Goldberg, Editors. 2009, San Francisco: Sharp Brains. 
Vemuti, P., et al., ‘Association of lifetime intellectual enrichment with 
cognitive decline in the older population’. JAMA Neuro/, 2014. 71(8): 
pp. 1017-24. 
Mattson, M.P., “Lifelong brain health is a lifelong challenge: from 
evolutionary principles to empirical evidence’. Ageing Res Rev, 2015. 20: 
pp. 37-45. 
Raichlen, D.A. and G. E. Alexander, ‘Adaptive Capacity: An 
Evolutionary Neuroscience Model Linking Exercise, Cognition, and 
Brain Health’. TINS, 2017. 40(7): pp. 408-21. 
Ontario Brain Institute, “The Role of Physical Activity in the 
Prevention and Management of Alzheimer’s Disease — Implications for 
Ontario’, 2013. 
Jacka, F.N., et al., ‘A randomised controlled trial of dietary 
improvement for adults with major depression (the “SMILES” trial)’. 
BMC Med, 2017. 15(1): p. 23. 
Wahl, D., et al., ‘Nutritional strategies to optimise cognitive function 
in the aging brain’. Ageing Res Rev, 2016. 31: pp. 80-92. 
Pollan, M., In defence of food. 2008, London: Penguin. 
Johansson, L., et al., ‘Common psychosocial stressors in middle- 
aged women related to longstanding distress and increased risk of 
Alzheimer’s disease: a 38—year longitudinal population study’. BMJ 
Open, 2013. 3(9): p. 003142. 
Holt-Lunstad, J., T.B. Smith and J.B. Layton, ‘Social relationships 
and mortality risk: a meta-analytic review’. PLoS Med, 2010. 7(7): 
p. e1000316. 
Boyle, P.A., et al., “Effect of a purpose in life on risk of incident 
Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment in community- 
dwelling older persons’. Arch Gen Psychiatry, 2010. 67(3): pp. 304-10. 


[PDF page 322]

If you would like to find out more about Hachette Australia, 
our authors, upcoming events and new releases you can 
visit our website or our social media channels: 
hachette.com.au 
Gi HachetteAustralia 
yw Oo HachetteAus 


[PDF page 323]

BALTIMORE COUNTY 
PUBLIC LIBRARY 


[PDF page 324]

JUNE 2019 
1183 19544 3830 
BALTIMORE COUNTY PUBLIC LIBRARY 
UNDERSTANDING HOW YOUR BRAIN GROWS 
AND CHANGES THROUGH THE STAGES OF LIFE 
IS KEY TO YOUR HEALTH AND WELLBEING. 
Dr Sarah McKay is a neuroscientist who knows everything worth 
knowing about women’s brains — and she shares it with you in this 
essential book. You'll be fascinated to learn what happens inside the 
brains and bodies of women as they move through the phases of their 
lives, and the unique — and often misunders‘S _ effects of = 
female biology and hormon SS & 
— = 
=° Weaving together findings from the researcha> = ise studies and 
© s working in the 
disciplines of neuroendocrinology, brain deveS Qt, brain health and 
ageing, Dr McKay provides crucial insights tt== — »hysical and mental 
health and reveals what is really going v.. de your brain. 
This comprehensive guide explores the brain 
during significant life stages: 
2 In Utero Q Depression and Anxiety 
2 Childhood Q Pregnancy and Motherhood 
Q Puberty 2 Menopause 
Q The Menstrual Cycle 2 The Ageing Brain 
© The Teenage Brain 
ISBN 978-0-7336- 
780733 
Ei hachette AUSTRALIA 9 ill Il ° 638 Also available 
as an ebook 
